 	
charteredaccountantsanz.c\Lom/futureinc
THE FUTURE OF WORK:	 	
HOW CAN WE ADAPT TO	 	
SURVIVE AND THRIVE?	
How do we prepare?	
Ageing population	Virtual global worker	
Job for 
life	
GL\fBALI\bATI\fN	
Uncertainty	
Agile workforce	
Creative destruction
Wellbeing	
PER\b\fNAL 
 	
BRAND	
Innovat ion	
Wave of change	 	
F\fUNDATI\fN F\fR 	
\bUCCE\b\b.	
DIGITAL 
 	
DI\bRUPTI\fN	
Technology	
Art of prosperity
Entrepreneur	
Lifest yle	
EMPLOYEES	
Adapt to survive and thrive	
Continued 	
growth in labour 	
productivity 	
RAPID PACE OF CHANGE	
AUTOMATION	
EDUCATION	
FLE\fIBILITY 	
\fCCUPATI\fN	
GREATER GLOBAL ECONOMIC INTEGRATION.	  	
P\fWER \fF DIVER\bITY	EXPERIENCE	
EDUCATI\fN  REMAIN\b  AN  IMP\fRTANT 	 	
F\fUNDATI\fN \fF \bUCCE\b\b IN THE 	
KN\fWLEDGE 	E C \f N \f M Y .      	
Peer-to-peer economy	
Reputation and trust are paramount	
ATTRACT, INCENTIVI\bE 	 	
AND RETAIN TALENT	
AUTOMATION Chartered Accountants Australia 	 	
and New Zealand
Chartered Accountants Australia and New 
Zealand is a professional body comprised of over 
115,000 diverse, talented and financially members 
who utilise their skills every day to make a 
difference for businesses the world over. 
Members are known for their professional integrity, 
principled judgement, financial discipline and a 
forward-looking approach to business which 
contributes to the prosperity of our nations. 
We focus on the education and lifelong learning of 
members, and engage in advocacy and thought 
leadership in areas of public interest that impact 
the economy and domestic and international 
capital markets.
We are a member of the International Federation 
of Accountants, and are connected globally 
through the 800,000-strong Global Accounting 
Alliance and Chartered Accountants Worldwide 
which brings together leading Institutes in 
Australia, England and Wales, Ireland, New 
Zealand, Scotland and South Africa to support 
and promote over 320,000 Chartered 
Accountants in more than 180 countries.	
Deloitte Access Economics	 is Australia’s 	 	
pre-eminent economics advisory practice and 	 	
a member of Deloitte’s global economics group. 
For more information, please visit our website  	 	
www.deloitteaccesseconomics.com.au
About Deloitte
Deloitte refers to one or more of Deloitte Touche 
Tohmatsu Limited, a UK private company limited 
by guarantee, and its network of member firms, 
each of which is a legally separate and 
independent entity. Please see 	www.deloitte.com/	
a u /a b o u t	 for a detailed description of the legal 	
structure of Deloitte Touche Tohmatsu Limited and 
its member firms.
About Deloitte Australia
In Australia, the member firm is the Australian 
partnership of Deloitte Touche Tohmatsu. As one 
of Australia’s leading professional services firms. 
Deloitte Touche Tohmatsu and its affiliates provide 
audit, tax, consulting, and financial advisory 
services through approximately 6,000 people 
across the country. Focused on the creation of 
value and growth, and known as an employer of 
choice for innovative human resources programs, 
we are dedicated to helping our clients and our 
people excel. For more information, please visit our 
web site at  	www.deloitte.com.au	
Liability limited by a scheme approved under 
Professional Standards Legislation.
Member of Deloitte Touche Tohmatsu Limited.	
Copyright © Februar y 201\f Char tered Accou\bta\bts Australia a\bd New Zeala\bd. All rights reser ved.
DI\bCLAIMER	  This publicatio\b was prepared by Char tered Accou\bta\bts Australia a\bd New Zeala\bd with the assista\bce of Deloit te Access Eco\bomics. 	It co\btai\bs ge\beral i\bformatio\b o\bly, \bo\be of Deloit te Touche Tohmatsu Limited, its member firms, or their related e\btities (collectively the “Deloit te Network ”) \bor Char tered Accou\bta\bts Australia a\bd New Zeala\bd are by mea\bs of this publicatio\b, re\bderi\bg professio\bal advice or ser vices. Before maki\bg a\by decisio\b or taki\bg a\by actio\b that may af fect your fi\ba\bces or your busi\bess, you should co\bsult a qualified professio\bal adviser. No warra\bt y is give\b to the correct\bess of the i\bformatio\b co\btai\bed i\b this publicatio\b, or its suitabilit y for use by you. To the fullest ex te\bt permit ted by law, \bo liabilit y is accepted by Char tered Accou\bta\bts Australia a\bd New Zeala\bd or a\by e\btit y i\b the Deloit te Network for a\by stateme\bt or opi\bio\b, or for a\by error or omissio\b or for a\by loss whatsoever sustai\bed by a\by perso\b who relies o\b this publicatio\b.
Char tered Accou\bta\bts Australia a\bd New Zeala\bd. Formed i\b Australia. Members of the orga\bisatio\b are \bot liable for the debts a\bd liabilities of the orga\bisatio\b. 	 	ABN 50 08 4 \f 42 571  	1215-07 FOREWORD
Prosperity doesn’t just happen. It 
needs to be planned. And the only 
way we can plan is to recognise 
and understand the forces that will 
influence the future.
This paper looks at trends such as the 
erosion of geographical barriers; an 
ageing population; digital disruption; 
and, the rise of the peer-to-peer 
economy. We know what will influence 
the future, and this paper argues 
that we need to ask ourselves the 
challenging questions now, about how 
we are going to respond not only to 
survive but thrive.
Each of us needs to recognise that our 
skills set, if left un-nurtured, will quickly 
become obsolete. Individuals need to 
ask themselves what skills they’ll need 
to succeed in an automated society. 
Our survey shows that 60% of people 
are currently thinking that they will 
change industry, their role or both in 
the next year. This attitude to work 
heralds a seismic shift in our attitude 
to careers. A job for life just doesn’t 
have a place in our modern society. 
Individuals will likely have a number 
of different careers in their lifetime – 
and they will need to commit to life 
long learning to ensure their skills are 
constantly honed.	
Lee White FCA	  	
CEO, Chartered Accountants 
Australia and New Zealand
Business also needs to address the 
impact of the increasingly mobile and 
flexible workforce on policies, systems 
and processes, including training 
for employees and the impact on 
the bottom line of attrition and high 
labour turnover.
Government and policy setters 
need to consider whether current 
immigration and industrial systems 
are flexible enough to accommodate 
a global workforce. Are school 
curriculum’s up to the task of teaching 
transferable skills and a different 
mindset about the future world of 
work?
The future of work poses considerable 	 	
challenges. The purpose of our 
future	[inc]	 series is to pose the 	
questions and start the debate.
Welcome to the conversation.	
charteredaccountantsanz.c\Lom/futureinc THE FUTURE OF WORK – AND THE 
PRE-REQUISITES FOR SUCCESS – WILL 
EMERGE OVER TIME. IT IS CLEAR THAT 
WE NEED TO BE READY AND WILLING TO 
ADAPT TO NEW CIRCUMSTANCES AND 
LEARN NEW SKILLS…  
To best adapt, survive, and thrive, we need 
to discuss and reconsider our answers to a 
range of questions that will shape our 
position in the workplace of the future.”  06
E\fECUTIVE SUMMARY	
08
INTRODUCTION	
10
FACTORS SHAPING 
THE FUTURE	
25
\bILL TECHNOLOGY 
DESTROY JOBS, OR 
CREATE THEM?	
29
A JOB FOR LIFE, OR 	 	
A JOB FOR NO\b?	
35
CAREERS: A \bINDING 
PATH TO SUCCESS	
39
FURTHER EDUCATION 
IS NO\b REQUIRED TO 
SUCCEED 	
44
\bILL MY GOALS 
CHANGE?	
49
SUCCESSFUL 
BUSINESS \bILL 
HAVE DIVERSE 
AND INCLUSIVE 
\bORKPLACES	
53
GLOBALISATION 
IS FACILITATING  
\bORKING ACROSS 
BORDERS	
57
CONCLUSION	
60
REFERENCES	
CONTENTS  6
EXECUTIVE 
SUMMARY	
Our economy and society are being shaped 
by large-scale shifts, from globalisation 
to digital disruption. Businesses are 
facing more intense pressures to respond 
to changing customer demands and 
new market entrants. Policy makers are 
reshaping their agendas. 
The forces of disruption are not just being 
driven by start-ups and felt by business 
leaders – they’re driving change in the 
workforce and labour market. 
Two-thirds of those with less than 
five years’ experience (early-career 
Australians) expect that their job will not 
exist, or will fundamentally change, in 
the next 15 years. 	If they are correct, this 	
means that there is likely to be a period of 
transition. Many will have to reskill, retrain 
or change jobs. Historically, the jobs that 
technology has destroyed have been 
more than offset by the new jobs that it 
has created. However, there may still be 
employees who lose out.	
Our career moves are not always straight 
up a ladder. 	Of those who will pursue a 	
new job in the next ten years, three in 
five are looking to change to a different 
industry, a different role, or both. 
Education – be that through technical 
institutions, training or university – remains 
an important foundation for success in all 
professions. It’s particularly important in 
the knowledge economy. Around 25% of 
the working-age population now possesses 
a Bachelor degree or higher qualification, 
compared to around 5% in the early 1980s. 
However, it can lose relevance quickly 	 	
– 52% of employees with less than five 
years’ experience already see their 
qualifications as not being “very much” 
relevant to their work	. Even though the 	
skills learned in higher education may not 
be highly relevant, they are increasingly 
transferable to different contexts. 
Approximately 40% of university educated 
employees have a degree outside of the 
primary and secondary study areas in 
their industry. 
THE FUTURE OF WORK: HOW CAN WE ADAPT TO SURVIVE AND THRIVE?   7	
For many, the qualifications gained before 
starting a career are only the beginning of 
a longer education journey. 	Half of early-	
career employees think that they are likely 
to pursue further formal education in the 
future.	 It’s not just university study which is 	
attractive; one quarter of employees say 
they are likely to pursue further informal 
education, such as online courses. But 
careers are broadly following similar 
timelines: average job tenure in Australia is 
seven years, and this has remained fairly 
steady over recent decades.
It is clear that our careers and perceptions 
are evolving rapidly, as the norm shifts in a 
more flexible, knowledge-based economy. 
The combination of greater global 
economic integration and technological 
advancements have led to 	the rise of the 	
“virtual global worker”, which means that 
we are	 increasingly competing on a global 	
scale.
What is most certain is that success – for 
both employers and employees – will 
depend on an ability to harness and 
embrace the power of diversity. 
Of those early in their careers, 28% ranked 
working with others from a diverse range 
of backgrounds in their top three career 
goals,	 and studies suggest that businesses 	
which increase workforce diversity could 
see significant gains in sales revenue. 	
As a nation, we need to ask 
ourselves some key questions. 
How do we prepare? How do 
individuals equip themselves 
for career success? How do 
we provide education which 
is agile enough to keep pace 
with changing needs? How do 
businesses attract, incentivise 
and retain talent? How 
do policy makers facilitate 
flexibility and the knowledge 
economy?
THIS SET OF QUESTIONS MAY SEEM 
FAMILIAR.	 However, we will need to 	
reconsider our answers in the future, 
with an increased need for agility 
in a more disrupted 	environment.	
ULTIMATELY	, WE NEED TO THINK 	
ABOUT HOW WE WILL ADAPT TO 
SURVIVE AND THRIVE	. 
future	[inc]  8
 
INTRODUCTION	
Individuals, businesses and policy makers are experiencing 	 	
a wave of change. 
Businesses are being disrupted as they 
face increased competition from lean digital 
businesses and international suppliers. 
With an ageing population, and increasing 
focus on convenience and timeliness, 
consumer profiles and preferences 	 	
are changing. 
In today’s busy and uncertain policy 
environment, wide-ranging reforms are 
being discussed, while the debate continues 
to be shaped by short-term media and 
political cycles. All of this operates in the 
context of longer-term “megatrends”, from 
technology to demographic change. Many 
of these are widely acknowledged; however, 
the pace of change is increasing. 
Policy makers, businesses and individuals 
will need to lift their eyes to the horizon, 
and think about the best way to ensure 
continued prosperity in this uncertain 
future.	
For our economy to thrive, we need a 
framework that will support a skilled, 
adaptable and agile workforce, with the 	 	
right tools for success.
Chartered Accountants Australia and New 
Zealand launched 	future	[inc]	, a thought 	
leadership series, to put forward a plan for 
continued prosperity in Australia and New 
Zealand. 
This piece builds on the December 2014 
publication in the series, 	Risk-wise and a 	
Fair Go? A plan for Australia’s continued 
prosperity	. It highlighted that our economy 	
and society continue to evolve, shaped 
by global and local megatrends. It noted 
the rise of risk-aversion in Australia, and 
increasing income disparity – despite the 
value Australians place on a “fair go”. The 
publication advocated becoming more 
literate and informed about risk, and noted 
the importance of policy in creating equality 
of opportunity. 
THE FUTURE OF WORK: HOW CAN WE ADAPT TO SURVIVE AND THRIVE?   9	
To ensure that the needs of the workforce 
and economy are met, an open discussion 
is needed. Having the evidence base to 
support this national conversation is key. 
Historical analysis can help to identify 
trends over time, and highlight fundamental 
shifts in skills, occupations and industries. 
However, the future of work will be shaped 
as much by the aspirations and perceptions 
of Australian employees as the demands of 
employers. 
To understand these aspirations and 
perceptions, Deloitte Access Economics 
conducted a survey of over 1,400 
Australian labour market participants. 
The results of this survey are presented 
throughout the document, and compared 
with other sources. A summary of the 
survey methodology is provided to the right.	
Deloitte Access Economics conducted a survey of 
over 1,400 Australian labour market participants,	 3  	
asking 28 questions to understand their employment 
history, as well as their perceptions, career 
aspirations and plans for the future. The survey 
was fielded in November and December 2015 by 
Stancombe Research and Planning. 
The survey looked at three cohorts: 	 	
early-career (0 – 5 years’ experience), 	 	
mid-career (6 – 14 years’ experience) and 	 	
developed-career (15+ years’ experience) employees. 
The respondents had a range of professions, ages 
and incomes, and worked in a number of industries.
The results of the survey are reflected throughout 
this document. 	
Having the right job at the right time is important. Our society and economy rely on a broad 
range of skills and occupations to function smoothly. The right job can also have a huge impact 
on individual material wellbeing and financial goals. 
More than that, though, it can provide social connectivity, personal satisfaction and the ability 
to use and improve on our skills.
An effectively functioning labour market is not just important for individuals, but also the 
overall economy. The value of our work – as measured by our wages – represents 48% of the 
Australian economy as a whole.	 1  Finding the right people, and having to replace staff who 	
have moved on, can be very costly for business – the cost of replacing one skilled employee is 
estimated at 75% of their annual salary.	 2  	
Ensuring continued growth in labour productivity is a key priority for policy makers, businesses 
and the economy overall. To maintain GDP growth at the level experienced from 2001 to 2013, 
we will need to increase labour productivity by almost 3% annually from 2014 to 2023 – higher 
than any level of growth we have achieved in the last three decades. 
In the context of a changing landscape with a national productivity challenge, our prosperity 
will rely on our workforce’s ability to adapt to new circumstances in order to survive and thrive.	 3
future	[inc]  10	
THE WORLD IS GETTING 
SMALLER	
DIGITAL DISRUPTION: 	 	
MORE WAVES	
AN OLDER AND MORE 
EXPERIENCED POPULATION	
THE PEER-TO-PEER	 	
ECONOMY
THE FUTURE OF WORK: HOW CAN WE ADAPT TO SURVIVE AND THRIVE?  
THE FUTURE OF WORK: HOW CAN WE ADAPT TO SURVIVE AND THRIVE?  
THE FUTURE OF WORK: HOW CAN WE ADAPT TO SURVIVE AND THRIVE?  
THE FUTURE OF WORK: HOW CAN WE ADAPT TO SURVIVE AND THRIVE?       
THE FUTURE OF WORK: HOW CAN WE ADAPT TO SURVIVE AND THRIVE?  
THE FUTURE OF WORK: HOW CAN WE ADAPT TO SURVIVE AND THRIVE?   11	
To plan for prosperity, we must first understand the forces 
which will influence the future. These range from climate change 
and urbanisation to demographic shifts and globalisation. 
This chapter discusses some of the mega-trends that will shape the policy, social and 
economic environment in coming decades. It focuses on four that are likely to have a 
significant impact on the future of work.
The first of these focuses on 	globalisation.	 	
Our key trading partners are experiencing 
shifting demand preferences, in an 
environment where free-trade agreements 
are enabling us to trade more openly. 
The world is getting smaller – and not 
just in terms of trade. Employees are 
internationally mobile; tasks can be out-
sourced or offshored.
More waves of 	digital disruption	 are 	
hitting Australian industries. As the 
pace of technological change continues 
to accelerate, unique opportunities, 
challenges and risks are introduced by 
digital disruption. For government services, 
digitising more transactions could create 
huge savings and improve the quality of 
interactions. 
The 	ageing population	 is generally 	
discussed as a source for concern. 
However, the experience and capabilities 
available in an older workforce should not 
be dismissed. Utilising these employees 
effectively could boost GDP. Our older 	
population also offers value through 
entrepreneurship - the average age of 
entrepreneurs in Australia is 45.
Finally, changing consumer demand is 
shaping the way we transact with each 
other. The 	peer-to-peer (P2P) economy 	
creates platforms that allow buyers and 
sellers to interact directly, with lower 
transaction costs. Trust and brand are 
paramount for success – for buyers, 
sellers and platforms. Although it does 
not represent a significant proportion of 
the economy, the P2P model is forcing 
traditional businesses to re-evaluate and 
react.  
Employees acknowledge the impact that 
these trends will have on their future. 
Almost one-third perceive that digital 
trends will drive occupational change in the 
next ten years, while one in four think that 
changing consumer demand will be a key 
determinant. 
future	[inc]  12
THE FUTURE OF WORK: HOW CAN WE ADAPT TO SURVIVE AND THRIVE?
12	
FIGURE 2.1:	 BIGGEST PERCEIVED DRIVERS OF OCCUPATIONAL CHANGE IN THE NE X T TEN YE ARS 	4	
FIGURE 2.2:	 EMOTION/S BEST DESCRIBING FEELING ABOUT FUTURE CAREER 	5	
Harnessing and embracing the momentum 
created by these global mega-trends 
can create opportunities for individuals, 
businesses and policy makers. Our 
research shows that, overall, employees 	
feel positive about their future careers. 
However, the changing environment has 
an impact; two in five are uncertain or 
nervous about what is to come.	
* May sum to more than 100\f as respondents were a\b\bowed mu\btip\be responses	
Digita\b/IT
G\boba\bisation	
Changing consumer demand	
Environmenta\b issues and 	c\bimate change	
Other	
Don’t know	
Positive or excited	Uncertain or nervous	
Worried or negative	
Don’t know or other	
32	
%
THE FUTURE OF WORK: HOW CAN WE ADAPT TO SURVIVE AND THRIVE?       13	
01
Geographical barriers have been eroding 
for decades. However, the pace of change 	 	
is increasing, and Australia is open for 
business. This process has been assisted 
by trade liberalisation through free trade 
agreements (most notably the Trans-
Pacific Partnership), increased trade in 
services and non-physical goods, and 
changing consumer preferences.
Our trading partners – and their 
appetites – are evolving. In China, the 
balance has shifted. We have seen a 
move from investment to consumption, 
from power (coal and gas) to protein 
(beef and mutton). As wealth increases 
in emerging economies, patterns of 
demand will continue to change. For 
Australia, this will create opportunities 
– such as larger export markets for 
services and primary industries – as 	 	
well as threats to traditional exports, 
such as coal. 
The flow of physical capital and 
technological know-how between 
countries has been an important 
facilitator of growth and global trade. 
However, developed economies 
increasingly rely on individuals – 
entrepreneurs, employees and 
researchers – to add value to the 
economy.
THE WORLD IS GETTING 
SMALLER	
The Australian beef 
industry has seen 
substantial growth in exports to 
China. Over the year to September 
2015, the value of beef exports to 
China nearly doubled.	 6 	
According to Geoff Raby, a business 
consultant and former Australian 
diplomat now based in Beijing, “per 
capita incomes have risen and, 
as per capita incomes rise above 
a certain level, demand for high 
protein, high value added foods 
– dairy, meats and so on – rises 
more rapidly than the demand for 
staples, and that opens up great 
opportunities.”	 7 
future	[inc]  14	
Like capital, our workforce is becoming 
increasingly mobile – both globally and 
locally. Both employees and employers 
recognise the advantages of working 
and studying abroad and the career 
development opportunities that it can 
provide. In 2014, almost two in three 
people globally were already working 
in another country, or willing to move to 
another country for work. Australia is 
well-placed to benefit: nearly one-third 
of foreigners would be willing to move to 
Australia, compared to two-fifths who 
would be willing to move to the US – the 
most preferred destination.	 8   	
Despite the attractiveness of 
international relocation, labour and 
immigration policy settings may not be 
conducive to international mobility. 
 	
Policy makers continue to grapple with 	 	
balancing concerns about providing jobs 
for residents with a domestic desire for 
more opportunities to work overseas, 
as well as local business demand for 
specialised skills and cheaper employees.
Policy makers are already making 
changes to attract the right talent. 
In its Innovation Statement released 
in December 2015, the government 
announced an intention to “enhance 
the visa system to attract the best and 
brightest entrepreneurial talent and skills 
to Australia” by:	 9   	
• establishing an Entrepreneur Visa for 
entrepreneurs with innovative ideas 
and financial backing from a third party. 
• making it easier for those with 
postgraduate research qualifications 
in science, technology, engineering 
and mathematics (STEM) to become 
Australian permanent residents.	
 
AUSTRALIA IS WELL-PLACED TO BENEFIT FROM A GLOBAL WORKFORCE 
- nearly one-third of foreigners would be willing to move to Australia, compared 
to two-fifths who would be willing to move to the US – the most preferred 
destination.	 	
 
THE FUTURE OF WORK: HOW CAN WE ADAPT TO SURVIVE AND THRIVE?   15	
DIGITAL DISRUPTION: MORE WAVES
The pace of technological change continues to accelerate. Devices, functions and uses 	 	
which are ubiquitous today would have seemed like science fiction only a decade ago. 
02
The touch-screen smartphone was 
launched in 2007. Today, they are not only 
widely used, but a central part of our lives – 
four in five Australians own a smartphone 
and we check them on average 30 times a 
d a y.	 10  DropBox, a cloud computing storage 	
solution, was introduced in 2007; it is now 
used by 95% of the ASX 100 and over eight 
million Australians.	 11	
Technological advancements are leading 
to significant changes for business. 
Technology has decreased barriers to 
entry. It is easier for new businesses to 
join the market and compete for market 	
share, intensifying competition. This 
competitive pressure, as well as quickly 
evolving consumer demand, means that 
incumbent businesses have to regularly 
review and adapt their business models. 
Incremental innovation and improvements 
are increasingly important.
This is leading to changes particularly in 
the knowledge workplace, driving faster 
growth, facilitating interaction of knowledge 
workers and increasing the attractiveness 
for skilled employees and overall prosperity 
for Australia. 	
The changing knowledge workplace
Technology, globalisation and changing worker demands are fundamentally changing where, 
how, and when knowledge workers work. The confluence of these forces is resulting in new 
performance drivers for today’s workplace and a series of new and exciting questions about what 
the workplace is and – more importantly – what it should be.
Deloitte’s 	Building the Lucky Country #5: The purpose of place – Reconsidered	 rejects the 	 	
common belief that technology has “trumped the tyranny of distance and place no longer 
matters”. Rather, the workplace is becoming more important for driving growth, interaction 
of knowledge workers, increased attractiveness for skilled and creative workers and overall 
prosperity for Australia.	 12	
Indeed, knowledge-intensive services display “clustering effects” referred to as economies 
of agglomeration. These occur when the productivity of knowledge workers increases at an 
exponential rate when they are in close proximity to each other, their interactions stimulating 
creativity and innovation for the economy. In particular, Australian businesses that foster 
collaboration in their workplaces are found to be over 70% more innovative than those that do not.	 13	
Further, employers who offer their workforce choice in when and where to work have employees 
who are 12% more satisfied with their jobs, and report higher effectiveness and improved 
performance.	 14  In 2012, half of Australia’s firms already allowed employees to use their own 	
laptop, tablet or smartphone for work purposes. That is a remarkable change compared with the 
constrictive IT policies that were common in Australian business just a few years earlier and it is 
still rapidly growing.	 15
future	[inc]  16	
These rapid changes are accompanied 
by unique opportunities, challenges and 
risks introduced by digital disruption.  In 
2012, Deloitte Access Economics identified 
the impact of digital disruption on various 
industries, and when it would be strongest.
Industries were classified by the length of 
their fuse (that is, the time it would take for 
the industry to experience significant digital 
disruption) and the size of the bang (that is, 
the expected change in percentage terms 
across a range of metrics). 
Industries which face market forces and 
have technology embedded in their 	
operations were classed as “short fuse, big 
bang” – experiencing an impact of greater 
than 15% within three years. For these 
industries, including professional services, 
disruption has already had a significant 
impact. 
However, the impact of disruption has not 
been fully felt yet in “long fuse” industries. 
Health and education, for example, are 
grappling with questions about how to 
provide high quality services remotely. 
Similarly, the utilities sector is facing 
growing pressure to innovate and increase 
efficiency, balancing environmental 
concerns with a push to reduce prices.	
FIGURE 2.3:	 DIGITAL DISRUPTION MAP 	1\f	
Impact (% change in business)	
Timi\bg (years)
Retail trade	
Real estate
Construction
Wholesale trade	Accommodation and food ser vices	
ICT and media	
Finance	Education	
Utilities
Mining	Manufacturing
Government 	 	services	
Transpor t and post
Recruitment and cleaning	
Health	
Agriculture	
Professional services	
Ar ts and recreation
LONG FUSE, BIG BANG	LONG FUSE, BIG BANG	32	% 	of the Australian economy	
33	% 	of the Australian economy	
SHORT FUSE, SMALL BANG	LONG FUSE, SMALL BANG	
17	% 	of the Australian economy	
18	% 	of the Australian economy	
1	2	3	4	5	0	
0
50
30
20
10
40
THE FUTURE OF WORK: HOW CAN WE ADAPT TO SURVIVE AND THRIVE?   17	
Changes in government services are of 
particular interest. We all interact with 
government regularly for a range of 
reasons, from changing ownership of 
assets and licensing, to collecting 	 	
social security payments and paying 	 	
taxes. These transactions can be time 	 	
consuming, which is costly to government 
and residents.	
This is starting to change. State and 
federal governments are seeking to utilise 
technology to its fullest extent in providing 
and streamlining service delivery. In the last 
year, state governments have begun to use 
digital service centres, combined with online 
portals, to manage a range of interactions 
more efficiently. If fully harnessed, the 
benefits from digitisation could add up to 
savings of nearly $18 billion for government.	18	
Digital disruption brings opportunities for Australia to deliver services more efficiently, as well 
as potential export opportunities. Deloitte’s 	Building the Lucky Country #3: Positioning for 	
Prosperity	 highlighted the digital delivery of health services as an area for future growth.	17  	
Australia’s geography means that we have a need to deliver sophisticated services to a 
highly dispersed population. This has led to the development of a competitive advantage in 
some tele-health services, including tele-triaging (call centres that assess what assistance is 
necessary and how to access it), remote patient monitoring (using set-top boxes with other 
devices to provide biometric measurements and monitoring of chronic health conditions) and 
tele-consultations (for example in psychiatry). 
These services contribute towards improving health in Australia, where those living in rural 
and remote areas, as well as Indigenous Australians, have lower life expectancies than the 
population overall. However, there are also opportunities to export these services to other 
countries with geographically dispersed populations, such as Western China, much of Africa 
and South Asia.  
future	[inc]  18	
However, these savings may come at a 
cost. More efficient services may mean 
fewer jobs in the public service, which 
includes some of the largest employers in 
the country. Deloitte Access Economics has 
previously calculated that around 50,138 
employees in public administration and 
safety – with occupations such as keyboard 
operators, mail sorters and enquiry clerks 
– could be affected by the digitisation of 
government transactions.	20	
There is still more to come. More 
widespread use of existing technologies 
across a larger range of industries 
and occupations will create greater 
opportunities. In addition, a number of 
emerging technologies could generate 
further change and growth, including:
•  artificial intelligence	 	
•  connected homes	 	
•  3D printing	 	
• block chain technologies, facilitating  
 crypto-currencies	 	
• mobile payments	 	
• wearables	 	
• genomics	 	
•  the internet of things	 	
• robotics	 	
• drones	 	
• electric and connected cars	 	
• virtual reality through oculus rift.	
FIGURE 2.4:	 GOVERNMENT BENEFITS FROM TRANSFORMATION 	19	
648.4	m	
Government benefits	
70.3	m	
49.3	m	42.6	m	
Online
490	m	
Telephone
139	m	Face-to-face
84.1	m	
Postal
9 7. 4	m	
Total savings
$ 1 7. 9	b	
 Total annual volume
 Forecast in 10 years	
THE FUTURE OF WORK: HOW CAN WE ADAPT TO SURVIVE AND THRIVE?
18	
$0.40	$6.60	$12.79	$16.90	
Cost per transaction	$
THE FUTURE OF WORK: HOW CAN WE ADAPT TO SURVIVE AND THRIVE?                    19	
AN OLDER AND MORE EXPERIENCED POPULATION
Population ageing has been a phenomenon in the developed world for centuries. However, 
many developing economies are now beginning to experience demographic transitions. 
03
The costs of ageing are commonly 
acknowledged. A smaller workforce will 
have to support a large retired population. 
The cost of health care and social security 
will continue to rise. 
Governments around the world are seeking 
policy solutions. Some European countries 
have increased retirement ages and 
decreased access to government pensions, 	
while many employers are rethinking 
defined benefit retirement schemes. 
Mandatory superannuation in Australia, 
combined with a higher retirement age of 
67 by 2023, has alleviated some of these 
concerns. However, there are still questions 
around whether retirees will have enough 
funds to be financially self-sufficient in 
retirement.  	
“Current demographic changes are unprecedented. 	 	
After remaining broadly unchanged for centuries, 	 	
the age structure of the world’s population is now 	 	
changing dramatically.”	 21	
FIGURE 2.5:	 OLDER PEOPLE AS A PROPORTION OF GLOBAL POPUL ATION 	22	
% OF GLOBAL POPUL ATION
25
20
15
10
5
0 1980  2015  2030  2050	
YEARS	
 \f0+   	 \f5+   	 80+
future	[inc]  20	
However, the conversation about the 
implications of ageing rarely considers the 
potential benefits. 	 	
Older people can contribute valuable 
skills, experience and assets to the 
economy. Indeed,	 as our economy 	
continues to shift its focus to be more 
k nowledge driven, this experience could 
prove more valuable than ever.
  
A 2013 survey of business leaders in the 
United States showed that four in five rated 
a job candidate’s applied skills in the field 
as being “very important”, whereas only 
28% ranked a university major the same.	23 	
Working 55 to 59 year olds in Australia do 	
not intend to retire until they are almost 	 	
63.	24  Discounting the importance of over 	
60s in the workplace is a common – but 
costly – mistake. 
Utilising older employees and leveraging 
their experience effectively could support 
growth in the future. Estimates suggest 
that a 5% increase in paid employment for 
Australians over 55 could boost GDP by 
$48 billion annually.	25  However, over half 	
of older Australians reported experiencing 
age discrimination when looking for a job.	26 	
Government regulation and legislation may 
also be age discriminatory. For example, 
the Australian Human Rights Commission 
cites the fact that workers’ compensation 
arrangements in some states cut off 
entitlements for those over the age of 65.	27	
FIGURE 2.6:	 SENIOR ENTREPRENEURSHIP 	28	
Average age	  	of Australian entrepreneurs	
Earnings	 by over 50s entrepreneurs	
Earnings	 by younger 	entrepreneurs
$115,000	
$264,000	
45
THE FUTURE OF WORK: HOW CAN WE ADAPT TO SURVIVE AND THRIVE?   21	
Despite common perceptions, start-ups 
are not all founded by 20-somethings. In 
fact, the average age of entrepreneurs in 
Australia is 45.	29  This is not unique – the 	
average age of an entrepreneur in the UK is 
4 7,	 30 and in the US it is 40.	31	
An estimated 590,000 small to medium 
enterprises in Australia are owned by over 
55s. These older entrepreneurs are able 
to bring experience and skills built through 
previous employment, as well as having 
more capital to invest in their business. The 
confluence of these factors may explain 
high rates of senior entrepreneurship.	32  	
However, other forces – such as difficulty 
finding suitable employment opportunities 
– may also play a role.	
Ignition Wealth is a 
fintech with a wealth 
management license, founded by 
Mark Fordree and Mike Giles in 2014. 
It provides a mobile-first platform for 
retail investment clients to invest and 
manage their portfolio for a low cost. 
Both Mark and Mike had over 30 
years’ experience in financial services 
when founding their business. This 
experience allowed them to identify a 	 	
gap in the market, reaching the 60 – 80% 
of savers in Australia who were priced 
out of the advice market. By using a 
technology-driven model, they can 
drive down fees, thus reaching a 
broader market.
Ignition Wealth is founded on the 
experience of its board, with senior 
advisers from the financial sector 
including Peter Meurer (the Chairman 
of Nomura Bank) and Tom Pockett 
(a non-executive director with the 
Stockland Group and Insurance 
Australia Group Limited).  
 
ESTIMATES SUGGEST THAT A 5% INCREASE IN PAID EMPLOYMENT FOR 
AUSTRALIANS OVER 55 COULD BOOST GDP BY $48 BILLION 	ANNUALLY.	
However	, over half of older Australians reported experiencing age discrimination 	
when looking for a job.	 	
 
future	[inc]  22	
04
THE PEER-T0-PEER ECONOMY
One of the key benefits of digital disruption over the last decade has been the reduction 
of transaction costs. Increasingly, buyers can connect directly with sellers, instead of 
having to go through layers of intermediaries. Platforms such as eBay allow us to transact 
in a virtual marketplace, with access to more choices and lower transaction costs. 
This way of buying and selling is known 
as the “peer-to-peer” (P2P) or “sharing” 
economy. Currently, it represents a 
relatively small proportion of the economy. 
In NSW, for example, estimates suggest 
that it represents 0.1% of the economy, 
based on the number of P2P businesses 
and their revenue.  	
Although the direct impact is not large, the 
P2P economy has a substantial reach. An 
estimated 61% of Australians have used 
a P2P service, such as Uber, Airbnb and 
eBay, and 85% intend to use one in the next 
y e a r.	33 Almost a quarter of Australians 	
spend at least $50 a month on P2P 
services.	34  This trend is mirrored globally 	
– in a 2014 international survey, two-thirds 
of respondents were willing to buy or sell 
products in a sharing or P2P community.	35 	
FIGURE 2.7:	 WILLINGNESS TO SHARE BY REGION 	3\f	
PERCENTAGE
80
\f0
40
20
0 
 Willi\bg to share ow\b assets     	 Willi\bg to share from others	
Asia Pacific	G\boba\b average	Midd\be East /Africa	Latin America	North America	Europe
THE FUTURE OF WORK: HOW CAN WE ADAPT TO SURVIVE AND THRIVE?   23	
The size of the P2P economy may 
remain small. However, the impact of 
disruptive P2P business models on 
traditional businesses will continue to be 
disproportionate, as P2P platforms have 
the potential to be a catalyst for change in 
traditional markets.
P2P platforms remove traditional 
hierarchies. Instead of having employers 
and employees, they provide a method for 
facilitating connections between sellers 
and buyers, generating change by lowering 
the costs and other barriers associated 
with entering the market. The brands we 
recognise and trust are often not directly 
involved in their own products.	
“Uber, the world’s largest taxi 
company, owns no vehicles… 
Alibaba, the most valuable 
retailer, has no inventor y. 	 	
And Airbnb, the world’s largest 
accommodation provider, owns 
no real estate.” 	37	
Future-proofing the profession: what is the future of work?	 discussed new marketplaces for 	
talent which are disrupting traditional models of work in professional services.	38  	
These platforms allow businesses to contract individuals to complete discrete tasks or 
challenges. Service marketplaces, including Upwork and 	Freelancer.com	, offer a range of 	
services to clients, from bookkeeping to graphic design. ELance reported that its freelancers 
had earned $3.2 billion dollars in cumulative earnings over five years. Kaggle, a competition 
platform for data science, enables organisations to tap into a worldwide network of analysts to 
work on their predictive modelling tasks.
These services can be directly in competition with traditional professional services providers. 
With a global network of contractors available and no overheads, companies may be able to 
receive the same service at a lower price. 
Some professional services firms have seen this as an opportunity rather than a threat, using 
these platforms as a means of sourcing innovative solutions at a low cost, or to temporarily 
contract staff with relevant skills. 
future	[inc]  24	
This new paradigm also creates risks. 
Without the ability to rely on a regulated 
corporation, sellers may be concerned that 
buyers will not pay, while buyers may be 
worried about the quality of a product or 
ser vice. 
Trust and reputation are paramount in 
the P2P economy.	 Many platforms have 	
established rating systems to provide 
confidence, and allow more informed 
decision making. These have proven to be 
an effective mechanism for self-regulation, 
building trust and ensuring quality. The vast 
majority of Uber drivers get ratings of over 
4 stars – indeed, drivers with ratings below 
4.6 stars are at risk of deactivation.	39	
Reputation has always been an important 
consideration for traditional and online 
businesses alike. However, our participation 
in the P2P economy means that we are 
now in the habit of reviewing – even when 
no direct mechanism is offered.	
Almost 70% of global consumers with 
internet 	access post concerns, offer 	
praise or discuss a customer service issue 
online	.40  Further, over half of customers 	
now use social media to provide feedback 
on products they’ve purchased– a far 
greater proportion than those who provide 
feedback directly through the website of a 
retailer or brand/manufacturer	.41  	
This is just one example of how traditional 
businesses and incumbents are being 
affected by the P2P economy. P2P 
businesses are shaping customer 
expectations. Traditional businesses are 
developing and reacting to compete in this 
environment. Some are leveraging the new 
platforms as a sales channel, while others 
are rethinking implications for their business 
models and customer engagement 
strategies. 	As a result, the largest impacts 	
of the emerging P2P economy may be seen 
outside of P2P businesses themselves.	
 
REPUTATION HAS ALWAYS BEEN AN IMPORTANT CONSIDERATION	 for 	
traditional and online businesses alike. However, our participation in the P2P 
economy means that we are now in the habit of reviewing – even when no direct 
mechanism is offered.	 	
 
THE FUTURE OF WORK: HOW CAN WE ADAPT TO SURVIVE AND THRIVE?          26	
A widespread concern in today’s society is that the future 
jobs market will be negatively affected by technological 
developments. 
As automation and artificial intelligence allow companies in both goods and services 
industries to reduce the size of their workforce, there is a fear of significant job losses.	42  	
Our survey figures show that two-thirds of 
early-career Australians are expecting that 
their job will not exist, or will fundamentally 
change, in the next 15 years. One in five	 	
employees with five or fewer years’ 
experience think their current job will not 
exist in 15 years. A further 47% think that 
their job will require very different skills or 
tasks. More experienced employees are 
less likely to expect fundamental change.	43 	
Almost one-third of employees believe that 	
the biggest driver of change in their job will 
be changes in digital and IT.
It should also be acknowledged that 
technology will lead to a reduction in job 
opportunities in some areas, for example 
as particular services are able to be 
automated, or productivity gains mean 
that less labour is required to complete 
a task. In the US, estimates suggest that 
approximately 47% of total employment 
may be at risk.	44  	
FIGURE 3.1:	  PERCEPTIONS OF INDIVIDUALS OF CHANGE IN CURRENT 	JOB OVER THE 	NE X T 15 YE ARS	 45	
PERCENTAGE
100
80
\f0
40
20
0
 	0-5 years’ 	 	experience	 	6-14 years’ 	 	experience	 	15+ years’ 	 	experience	
 I don’t know
  Not at all	 – my curre\bt job 	 	will be exactly the same
  A small extent 	– my curre\bt job 	 	will o\bly cha\bge a lit tle
  Neutral	 – my curre\bt job 	 	will evolve slowly over time
  \bomewhat	 – my curre\bt job will exist, 	but require ver y dif fere\bt skills or tasks
  A great extent	 – my curre\bt job 	 	will \bot exist	
7%
8%
14%
29%
29%
13%	
14%
25%
32%
19%	
4%	6%	5%	4%	7%
17%
47%
20%
THE FUTURE OF WORK: HOW CAN WE ADAPT TO SURVIVE AND THRIVE?   27	
However, the perception that technological 
developments lead to job losses overlooks 
the fact that technology can also provide 
opportunities to create new jobs. The 
debate surrounding technology and 
employment tends to be skewed towards 
job destruction rather than creation, 
because “the destruction brought 
about by technology is direct and easily 
observed, [while] the creative effects are 
far more chaotic and unpredictable.	” 46 This	 	
exacerbates a common behavioural bias of 
loss aversion – we dislike losses more than 
we like equivalent gains.
For example, while technological innovation 
has resulted in less employment in menial 
or “muscle power” jobs, there has been a 
significant long-term shift towards jobs that 
involve caring for others, which increased 
from around 1% of the UK workforce in 1871 
to 12% in 2011.	 47 	
This is because these jobs – which include 
health, teaching and welfare professionals 
– generally involve non-routine manual 
tasks, where there has been little 
opportunity to apply technology given the 
current state of technological development. 
The trend towards occupations in the 
“caring” sector also partly reflects the 
significant increase in women’s workforce 
participation over the last 140 years, as 
prior to this, many of these “caring” tasks 
were performed by women at home.
FIGURE 3.2:	 SHARE OF TOTAL EMPLOYMENT IN THE UK 	48	
Occupation type 1871 2011
Caring  1.1% 12.2%
Muscle power 23.7% 8.3%	
Given the rapid pace of technological 
change, it is apparent that technology will 
have the potential to create new jobs in 
areas that may not have been thought 
of previously, with many professions that 
are thriving today being areas that no one 
would have predicted decades ago.	49  	
An example of this is in the area of data 
analytics, which has seen a significant 
increase in job opportunities over recent 
years as technology unlocks the potential 
for using big data to improve decision 
making and provide a competitive edge in 
understanding customer trends.	 50   	
Many of these jobs would not have been 
around even just ten or 15 years ago; 
similarly, with new technologies being 
developed at a rapid rate, occupations that 
will see significant jobs growth in future 
decades may not currently exist.
Not all the new jobs will be in technology. As 
consumer demographics and preferences 
change, the mix of jobs will shift to meet 
demand. For example, this might mean 
more personal trainers and gym instructors, 
or more chefs and in-home carers.	 	
Although technology is likely to create 
new jobs, there are concerns about the 
distributional impacts of this change. 
The increasing role of technology, both to 
augment and potentially replace labour, 
can create employment polarisation. 
Routine jobs that require precision – for 
example, bookkeeping or manufacturing 
– can often be done more efficiently and 
accurately by computers. 
future	[inc]  28	
Less routine tasks, however, are better 
undertaken by humans. This is why it is 
often thought that high-skill jobs, such as 
managerial and professional roles, are 
least likely to be replaced. However, many 
lower-skilled tasks are also non-routine, 
and are also not likely to be replaced. 
For example, stocking shelves is easy for 
humans with hand-eye coordination, but 
can be very difficult for machines in a 	 	
retail setting. 
Research by economists in the United 
Kingdom found evidence that jobs requiring 
non-routine tasks tended to be at the 
bottom and top of the wage distribution, 
whereas routine tasks are concentrated 
in the middle. They also found that there 
was evidence of job polarisation in the UK 
between 1975 and 1999, where there was 
a decline in the number of middling jobs, 
balanced by growth in low-paying service 
occupations and significant growth in 
professional and managerial roles.	 51 	
However, it has been argued that full job 
polarisation may not eventuate because 
“while some of the tasks in many current 
middle-skill jobs are susceptible to 
automation, many middle-skill jobs will 	
continue to demand a mixture of tasks 	 	
from across the skill spectrum.”	 52   	
Tasks that require creative or lateral 
thinking are the least susceptible to 
automation and many jobs require a 
mixture of both technical and creative 
elements.
“The economy-wide employment 
impact [of technological change] is 
likely to be positive, provided that 
the mechanisms for translating 
technology into jobs are not 
impaired by deficiencies in training 
and innovation systems.”	 53  	
The important consideration here for 
businesses and policymakers is ensuring 
that employees who are displaced by these 
technological changes in the future have 
the training and development opportunities 
to upskill or reskill in areas that allow them 
to pursue other jobs and careers. For 
example, in Denmark, the government has 
extensive active labour market policies in 
education and training to assist employees 
in developing the skills required in an age of 
technological change and globalisation.	 54	
CALL TO ACTION	
BUSINESSES:	 What are the manual tasks which could be automated in 	
your organisation?  	 	
How will you ensure that the skills of your employees remain relevant 
and useful?
POLICY MAKERS	: How will you equip and enable those whose jobs 	
are destroyed to continue in employment?
INDIVIDUALS:	 How will technology impact on your job? 	 	
What skills will you need to succeed in a more automated economy?
THE FUTURE OF WORK: HOW CAN WE ADAPT TO SURVIVE AND THRIVE?   29
future	[in  
future	[in   30	
Employees are expected to move around more in the future. Our research shows that 
employees are not just looking for new employers when they move. Of those who will 
pursue a new job in the next ten years, three in five are looking to change to a different 
industry, a different role, or both. 	55	
These findings are supported by 2013 
statistics from the Australian Bureau of 
Statistics (ABS), which showed that, of 
those who had changed employers in the 
last 12 months, 51% had also changed 
industry and 39% had changed major 
occupation group.	57 	
There is more evidence that our 
respondents’ perceptions are consistent 
with reality. Of those who have changed 
roles at least once in their career, 58% 
feel that they have a similar role, whether 
that be with the same employer (21%) or 
a new one (37%).	
Employees are generally twice as likely 
to change jobs for voluntary reasons 
such as pursuing new opportunities or 
personal lifestyle motives, as compared 
with involuntary reasons such as being 
retrenched.	58	
In addition, the fact that many workers 
expect to voluntarily move between jobs 
and careers could reflect the changing 
nature of the labour market over recent 
decades. 
In the past, a job applicant who had 
previously worked in a number of 	
FIGURE 4.1:	 NATURE OF THE NEW JOB PURSUED IN THE NE X T TEN YE ARS	 5\f	
Do\b’t k\bow	
A dif fere\bt role i\b the same i\bdustr y
A dif fere\bt role i\b a dif fere\bt i\bdustr y
A similar role but i\b a dif fere\bt i\bdustr y	
A similar role i\b the same i\bdustr y	
0 5  10  15  20 25  30	35	
PERCENTAGE	
7%
7%	
23%	
30%	
33%	
60\f are changing industr y, ro\be or both
THE FUTURE OF WORK: HOW CAN WE ADAPT TO SURVIVE AND THRIVE?     31	
different positions was perceived as 
lacking loyalty or being unable to settle 
down in a job. Now, however, agility and 
diversity in a potential employee’s work 
history is often seen as an ability on the 
part of the applicant to confront change, 
embrace different challenges and 
operate in different work environments.
The cost of replacing one skilled 
employee can be equivalent to 75% of 
their salary.	59  Historically, businesses 	
have sought to reduce this cost by 
reducing turnover. However, given 
the value of agility and diversity, the 
emphasis should shift from reducing 
turnover to decreasing its cost. 
Developing a more flexible workforce with 
more adaptable systems could be one 
way of achieving this.
A number of trends will affect job 
turnover and tenure over future years. 
In particular, the Australian Human 
Resources Institute’s 2015 Pulse Survey 
on Turnover and Retention described 
the increasing importance of technology 
in improving employees’ access to 
information about new job opportunities, 
highlighting social media and professional 
networking websites such as LinkedIn 
as providing existing and potential 
employees with greater capabilities 
not just to search for employment, 
but to intelligently match employees 
with employers.	60  The platform has 	
demonstrated success, reporting almost 
one million hires in 2014.	61 	
The increasing prevalence and accessibility	  	
of these technologies has the potential to 	 	
facilitate increased voluntary job 	
mobility amongst young employees 	in 	
particular, who already tend to have 
shorter job tenure compared to older 
employees. Youth job mobility is also 
linked to household mobility, with younger 
employees often being more willing 
and able to relocate (sometimes even 
interstate) to pursue new employment 
opportunities.	62 	
Given that improving economic conditions 
are generally associated with increased 
confidence in the jobs market and more 
opportunities for employees to voluntarily 
change jobs, job mobility could increase 
over the coming years as Australia’s 
economy continues to grow following 
the uncertainty caused by the global 
financial crisis.	 	
However, this growing confidence could 
also be creating unrealistic expectations. 
Our survey shows that, on average, early-
career employees think they will retire at 
the age of 52. Given the increasing costs 
of retirement, the smaller workforce 
and pressure on government budgets, 
this seems untenable. Policy makers 
may need to adjust the expectations of 
younger workers to this reality.
Notwithstanding these potential future 
trends, job tenure in Australia has 
actually been relatively stable over 
recent decades, at around seven years 
across all employees.	63  There has been a 	
slight increase in the share of employees 
working for the same employer for more 
future	[inc]  32	
than ten years, matched by a slight 
decrease in those employed for less than 
one year – though this does not account 
for employees experiencing a change 
in the nature of their job with the same 
employer. Previous research has found 
that within the space of a year, around 
20% of employees changed their usual 
hours, were promoted or transferred, 	 	
or changed occupations within the 	 	
same firm.	64 	
Our research shows that the average 
number of roles that a person has had 
over their career increases with experience. 
Similarly, the median number of employers 
that an individual has had escalates with 
experience. This is intuitive, since more time 
spent in the workforce means more time for 
changes.	
FIGURE 4.2:	 EMPLOYEE TENURE IN AUSTRALIA	 \f5	
PERCENTAGE
40
35
30
25
20
15
10
5
0
 	< 1 year 1 to 	<3 years 3 to 	<10 years 10 to 	<20 years  20	+ years	
 Feb 94     	 Feb 04     	 Aug 15
THE FUTURE OF WORK: HOW CAN WE ADAPT TO SURVIVE AND THRIVE?   33	
Some of the broader trends that have 
potentially affected job tenure since the 
1990s in Australia include:
• relatively stable economic conditions 	in 	
the broader macroeconomic environment, 	 	
which are likely to inspire confidence and 
thus both job mobility and hiring, despite 
some uncertainty following the global 
financial crisis which could encourage 
employees to be more risk averse and 
avoid changing jobs.	
• increased life expectancies and higher 
retirement ages leading to older 
employees remaining in their jobs 
for longer, which could lead to longer 
tenures	.67  	
• more opportunities for job seekers 
to search for new employment, with 
technological developments such as 
online recruitment and mobile job search 
apps increasing the ease of finding new 
jobs by decreasing search costs, which 
should in turn increase job mobility and 
decrease tenure. 	
FIGURE 4.3:	 NUMBER OF EMPLOYERS SINCE FINISHING FULL-TIME EDUCATION 	\f\f	
NUMBER  OF  INDIVIDUALS
140
120
100
80
\f0
40
20
0 1  2 3 4 5 6  7 8  9 10	
NUMBER OF EMPLOYERS OVER  CAREER	
 0-5 years‘ experie\bce   	 5-14 years‘ experie\bce   	 15+ years‘ experie\bce
future	[inc]  34	
CALL TO ACTION	
BUSINESSES:	 Do you currently have, or will you develop, a strategy to 	
combat higher turnover? 	 	
How will your business recruit and retain in a higher turnover 
environment?
POLICY MAKERS:	 What are the institutional barriers to 	
employment mobility? 	 	
How can the costs of employee turnover be reduced?
INDIVIDUALS:	 How many careers will you have over your life? 
THE FUTURE OF WORK: HOW CAN WE ADAPT TO SURVIVE AND THRIVE?   35
future	[in 
future	[in     36	
Is it preferable to possess a specialised skillset or more 
generalist skills? Should employees develop deeper knowledge 
of a single area as they progress through their career, or is a 
generalist set of skills that can be broadly applied to different 
areas more desirable? 
There can be benefits and costs associated 
with both approaches to skills development.
Many early-career employees think that 
they will be experts in one specific topic or 	 	
area by the end of their career. However, 
experienced employees predominantly 
identif y 	as generalists, with a broad 	
understanding of a range of topics (53%). 
This gap could be	 symptomatic of a 	
changing workforce, or could simply show 	
that less experienced employees have 
miscalibrated perceptions, as they will 
tend to accumulate more skills of a general 
nature through their working career.
In a world where skills requirements can 
vary throughout someone’s working life, 
formal training shouldn’t be “set-and-
forget”. Over half of early-career employees 
think that their field/s of study is not ”very 
much” relevant to the field that they 	
FIGURE 5.1:	 PERCEIVED NATURE OF SKILL-SE T AT END OF CAREER	 \f8	
PERCENTAGE
100
80
\f0
40
20
0
 	0-5 years’ 
experience	 	6-14 years’ 
experience	 	15+ years’ 
experience	
  I do\b’t k\bow
   I will have a broad u\bdersta\bdi\bg of a ra\bge of topics
   I will have deep skills i\b t wo specific but related fields
 I will be a\b exper t at o\be specific topic/area	
14%	14%	
53%
19%
14%	
28%
27%
31%	
7%
21%
30%
42%
THE FUTURE OF WORK: HOW CAN WE ADAPT TO SURVIVE AND THRIVE?   37	
are working in. Relevance declines with 
experience – 59% of those with over 15 
years’ experience don’t think their study is 
“ver y much” relevant.
Furthermore, many Australian employees 
are taking non-traditional or non-linear 
career paths following on from their 
university education. The skills gained from 
studying particular degrees are becoming 
increasingly transferable: Census data 
from 2011 suggests that, for university 
educated employees, approximately 40% 
had a degree outside of the primary and 
secondary study areas in their industry. 
For example, more than half of all 
employees in the professional services 
industry studied degrees outside the 
primary (commerce) and secondary 
(engineering) fields of study for the industry. 	 
Even in industries where skills are relatively 
specialised, such as mining and health 
care, between one-quarter to one-third of 
employees studied in alternative areas.
 
This also means that it is important to 
provide professional development and 
training opportunities to employees once 
they have entered the workforce, as 
relevant skills can be developed throughout 
a career. Research by the Institute of 
Chartered Accountants in England and 
Wales suggests that providing such 
opportunities is particularly important in 
small businesses, as employees are more 
likely to take on a variety of roles that 
require different skills. Their 2015 Skills 
and Productivity report noted that “this 	
FIGURE 5.2:	 RELE VANCE OF STUDY TO FIELD OF WORK 	\f9	
PERCENTAGE
100
80
\f0
40
20
0
 	0-5 years’ 
experience	 	6-14 years’ 
experience	 	15+ years’ 
experience	
  Do\b’t k\bow/u\bsure
   Ver y much
 Somewhat
   Neutral
 Not really
   Not at all	
4%
37%
23%
14%
8%
14%	
22%
47%
8%
8%
12%	
1%	3%	
28%
47%
10%
6%
8%
future	[inc]  38	
relies both on employees being able to 
refresh and upgrade their own skills, and on 
employers investing in their workforce.”	 70  	
Small businesses account for almost half 
of private sector industry employment in 
Australia	.71  This suggests that providing 	
professional development opportunities to 
employees throughout their working career 
will be especially important for ensuring 
that their skills can keep pace with changing 
business practices and employer demands 
in the future.
In the UK, a survey of white collar 
professionals by recruiter PageGroup 	 	
found that around half of professional 
employees consider themselves to be 
generalists, with many taking on activities 
outside of their main remit within the 
first two years of entering a new job	.72  	
While there are benefits associated with 
engaging in these additional tasks and 
responsibilities, such 	as broadening 	 	
skillsets and being better prepared for 
senior roles, this can come at the cost of 
losing specialist knowledge and reducing a 
business’s ability to innovate. 
The decision of whether to develop a 
generalist versus specialist skillset will 
vary from industry to industry and from 
individual to individual – and even for a 
given individual over time as their careers 
and motivations change. For example, in 
a rapidly changing labour market where 
workers are required to adapt quickly to 
different situations, a generalist set of skills 
may be more useful. The question then 
becomes: should these generalist skills be 
emphasised more in the formal 	education 	
system, or can they only be imparted in 
the workplace? Such questions and the 
nature of skills development more broadly 
will become an increasingly important 
consideration for employees in the future as 
the interaction between skills, employment 
and careers becomes more fluid.	
CALL TO ACTION	
BUSINESSES:	 What value could you get from considering applicants 	
who have qualifications in other fields?
POLICY MAKERS:	 How does school education provide transferable skills?	  	
Is the balance between generalist and specialist training right? 	 	
How do we provide education which is agile enough to keep pace with 
changing needs?
INDIVIDUALS:	 Is it preferable to possess a specialised skillset or 	
more generalist skills? 
THE FUTURE OF WORK: HOW CAN WE ADAPT TO SURVIVE AND THRIVE?   39
future	[in 
future	[in      40	
Like many other advanced economies around the world, 
Australia has been moving away from lower skilled and highly 
labour-intensive industries towards more knowledge-intensive 
industries that require more highly skilled employees. 
The widespread adoption of new communication technologies, in combination with lower 
trade barriers, has made it easier for our economy to specialise, taking advantage of 
Australia’s comparative strengths. These include our educated workforce, competitive 
environment and good physical and communications infrastructure	.73 	
This transition towards a knowledge-based 
economy has occurred gradually over the 
past few decades, and has resulted in a 
shift in the occupation mix of Australian 
employees. For example, since the mid-
1980s, the share of professionals in the 
workforce increased from 15% to 23%, 	
while the share of community and personal 
service employees has risen from 6% to 
11%. In contrast, the shares of employees 
who are labourers, technicians and trades 
employees, or machinery operators and 
drivers have all declined over this period.	
FIGURE 6.1:	 CHANGE IN OCCUPATION MIX BE T WEEN 198\f AND 2015 	74	
PERCENTAGE
70
\f0
50
40
30
20
10
0 	1986 2015	
YEAR	
15%
18%
8%
13%
6%	
23%
11%
15%
6%
9%	
   Commu\bit y a\bd perso\bal ser vice workers
 Professio\bals
 Tech\bicia\bs a\bd trades workers
 Machi\ber y operators a\bd drivers
 Labourers
THE FUTURE OF WORK: HOW CAN WE ADAPT TO SURVIVE AND THRIVE?   41	
Given the relatively greater emphasis on 
highly skilled occupations in the workforce, 
employees in the Australian economy 
have generally become more qualified 	
over recent decades. Around 25% of the 
working-age population now possesses 
a Bachelor degree or higher qualification, 
compared to around 5% in the early 1980s	.75	
The perceived importance of education 
doesn’t end at entry to the workforce. 
Half of early-career employees think that 
they are likely to pursue further formal 
education in the future. More experienced 
employees are much less likely to go back to 
formal education (16% for those with 15 or 
more years’ experience)	.77  	
It’s not just formal education that employees 
will pursue. One quarter of employees 
say they are likely to pursue other further 
education, such as online courses. Although 
this is much more common among less 
experienced employees, older employees	 	
still perceive	 value in this type of education 	
– nearly one-fifth of all experienced 
employees also intended to pursue further 
informal education	.78    	
Grow th in k nowledge-intensive industries 
is expected to increase further in the 
future, as Australia continues to focus on 
areas of competitive advantage.
 
Consistent with this, much of the focus of 
industry policy across the country has been 
targeted towards industry development 
and innovation in these areas.	
FIGURE 6.2:	 PROPORTION OF WORKING-AGE POPUL ATION WITH BACHELOR DEGREE OR ABOVE 	7\f	
PERCENTAGE
30
25
20
15
10
5
0 1982  1986 1990  1994 1998  2002 2006  2010	
YEARS
future	[inc]  42	
However, there are concerns about 
those who may be left behind. Although 
approximately 72% of Australians aged 
between 25 and 44 have a non-school 
qualification, only 65.5% of males and 
63.2% of females aged between 45 and 54 
have a non-school qualification	.79  Those 	
who may have been employed in industries 
such as manufacturing may struggle to 
find a place in a more knowledge-intensive 
economy.
Government can play an important role in 
helping to reskill workers with the tools for 
success in a changing workplace. This is 
done through programmes such as Skills 
for Education and Employment, which 
provides funding for accredited training in 
literacy and numeracy, as well as advanced 
training	.80  However, in some cases the 	
government has taken more direct action 
For example, the Skills and Training 
Initiative was established to help workers 
from Holden and Toyota in South Australia 
and Victoria transition to new jobs	.81 	
Given the accelerating rate of change, it 
will be important for future knowledge 
employees to be equipped from the 
outset with the education and skills 	
required in a knowledge-based economy. 
While this includes formal study such as 
university education, ongoing training and 
professional development once employees 
have entered employment will also be 
important in ensuring that employees’ 
skills remain relevant to businesses’ 
requirements. This will help to facilitate 
continued growth and innovation across 
knowledge-intensive industries in the 
future. 	 	
Our research shows that one-third 	 	
of those who are likely to pursue further 
education are willing to contribute 
towards the cost. However, three in five 
want some form of financial support, 
whether that is from government (17%), 
an employer (12%) or family (11%).
For those who need financial support, it 
can be a deciding factor. Nearly one in five 
of individuals who would use support said 
they would not pursue further education if 
this funding was not available. 	
 
Nearly one in five of individuals who would use support said they 	WOULD NOT 	
PURSUE FURTHER EDUCATION	 if this funding was not available.	 	
 
THE FUTURE OF WORK: HOW CAN WE ADAPT TO SURVIVE AND THRIVE?   43	
CALL TO ACTION	
BUSINESSES:	  How will you support professional development and 	
formal education for your top talent?
POLICY MAKERS:	 Should government play a role in funding ongoing 	
education? 	 	
Are there certain individuals or forms of education that should be 
given priority?
INDIVIDUALS:	 What types of education will be most valuable for 	
you to pursue in the future?	
Professional development includes not only 
development at an individual professional 
level, but also the development of jobs and 
roles so that different positions within an 
organisation have genuine opportunities 
for innovation, creativity and productivity 
improvements. This could include expanding 
the knowledge content, span of control 
and scope for innovation associated with 	
particular roles, and may involve employees 
working with senior management to 
determine how to best develop their jobs	.82  	
In doing so, employees and businesses 
can work together to ensure that the 
knowledge-intensive industries in our 
economy continue to be a driver of future 
economic growth in Australia.
future	[inc]  44
THE FUTURE OF WORK: HOW CAN WE ADAPT TO SURVIVE AND THRIVE?       
THE FUTURE OF WORK: HOW CAN WE ADAPT TO SURVIVE AND THRIVE?   45	
It is clear from our research that career goals and 
perceptions of the future vary with experience. Although 
some things – such as the pursuit of financial success – are 
common, other factors, such as perceived skill mix, vary 
between cohorts. 
Are these differences driven by fundamental differences between generations, or do 
they simply reflect the life stages of individuals, which will evolve in the future? 
The answer to this question will emerge 
over time. If these shifts are the result of 
underlying societal change, government 
and businesses will need to develop new 
ways of thinking about the labour force. 
On the other hand, if the preferences 
of less experienced workers will evolve 
over time, this could create a difficult 
transition, both for workers and for 
businesses that have actively structured 
strategies around them. 
There is widespread discussion about 
how generations differ in terms of 
perceptions, goals and values. Studies 
have found that there are generational 
differences in work values such as the 
desirability of work outcome, pride in 	
craftsmanship and moral importance 	 	
of work.	83 	
However, there is also a question of 
whether some observed differences are 
a result of life stage, and will change over 
time. Do millennials really favour altruistic 
work values, or is this an idealism which 
might shift in the future?
Our research shows that individuals 
with different levels of experience have 
different career goals. For example, it 
supports the argument that younger or 
less experienced employees are more 
likely to want to run their own business, 
and that more experienced employees 
put more emphasis on job security.
future	[inc]  46	
Some of our findings contradict 
conventional ideas. For example, early 
career employees are less likely to rank 
having a positive impact on society as a 
top three goal relative to older employees, 
and tend to place a lot of emphasis on 
high income and financial success. On the 
other hand, more experienced employees 
are much more likely than early-career 
employees to value having a good work-life 
balance and working for an inspiring leader. 
It is difficult to determine whether these 
values will shift over time. Studies suggest	 	
that although age and life-stage are a 
factor, there are some purely generational 
differences. Research by Twenge et al 
isolated generational differences from age 
differences, and found that more recent 
generations were in fact more likely to 
value leisure, but that the generation born 
between 1982 and 1999 is less likely to 
value a work context that provides intrinsic 
rewards (such as a job which provides 
interesting work, the chance to be creative 
or the chance to learn new things and skills) 
relative to the two prior generations.	85 	
FIGURE 7.1:	 SELECTED TOP RANKED CAREER GOALS BY E XPERIENCE	 84	
PERCENTAGE
80
70
\f0
50
40
30
20
10
0
 	High income and  
financia\b success	 	Run my own  business	 	Job security	 	Have good   
work-\bife ba\bance	
  0-5 years’ experie\bce   	 \f -14 years’ experie\bce   	 15+ years’ experie\bce    
THE FUTURE OF WORK: HOW CAN WE ADAPT TO SURVIVE AND THRIVE?   47	
Perceptions can also change between 
generations and age groupss.  Our 
research shows that less experienced 
employees perceive that they will spend 
less time with each employer, compared 
to more experienced employees. In fact, 
the median early-career employee with 
less than five years’ experience thinks that 
they will work for five years for any given 	
employer – half the tenure of what an 
employee with over 15 years’ experience 
reports (ten years). 
Given that two in every five early-career 
employees cited job security as one of their 
three greatest career goals, it is not clear 
whether these perceptions will change as 
people progress through their careers.	 	
FIGURE 7.2:	 AVERAGE PERCEIVED LENGTH OF TENURE WITH ANY GIVEN EMPLOYER THROUGH CAREER 	8\f	
NUMBER  OF  RESPONSES
70
\f0
50
40
30
20
10
0 1  2  3 4 5 6 7  8 9 10 11-14  15-29  30+	
TIME \bITH  EMPLOYER	
 0-5 years‘ experie\bce   	 \f -14 years‘ experie\bce   	 15+ years‘ experie\bce
future	[inc]  48	
CALL TO ACTION	
BUSINESSES:	  Will you have strategies for attracting and retaining 	
talent which are catered to different generations or stages of life?
POLICY MAKERS:	 What is your role in bridging the gap between 	
perceptions and reality?
INDIVIDUALS:	 To what extent are your goals and perceptions likely 	
to change as your life circumstances change?
THE FUTURE OF WORK: HOW CAN WE ADAPT TO SURVIVE AND THRIVE?   49	
SUCCESSFUL 
BUSINESS WILL 
HAVE DIVERSE 
AND INCLUSIVE 
WORKPL ACES
future	[inc]  50	
Diversity in the workforce can have a significant positive 
impact on the overall business. Our survey found that early-
career employees are more likely than more experienced 
employees to rate diversity as a high priority career aspiration. 
In particular, 28% of employees with five years’ experience or less ranked working with 
others from a diverse range of backgrounds in their top three career goals.
Teams of mixed gender, age, ethnicity and 
sexual orientation can offer a wider range 
of perspectives and experience compared 
to a more homogeneous workforce, 
which generally improves overall business 
decision making and problem solving. 
An American Sociological Association study 
found that workplace diversity is associated 
with improved financial performance, with a 
one unit rise in the rate of gender diversity 
leading to a 3% rise in sales revenue, and a 
one unit rise in the rate of ethnic diversity 
leading to a 9% rise in sales revenue	.87  	
The study measured diversity “units” using 
indices that considered the probability 
that two individuals chosen randomly 
from a workforce belonged to different 
gender or racial groups, accounting for how 
each group is represented in the broader 
population. The diversity index for gender 
ranged from 0 (homogeneous male) to 46 
(gender parity equivalent to population 
proportions), while for race it ranged from 
0 (homogeneous white) to 25 (racial parity 
equivalent to population proportions).
Diversity was described as having a 
number of positive implications for 
workplace dynamics and business 
outcomes, including:
• increased opportunities for creativity 	
and innovation as diverse groups work 
together and capitalise on their unique 
qualities;	
• improved consumer perceptions which 	
influence purchasing practices, as well 
as better understanding of customers 
from diverse backgrounds;	
• higher retention rates for existing staff 	
as well as a greater ability to attract 
top talent in a competitive global labour 
market.	
In addition, businesses are increasingly 
beginning to recognise that having a 
diverse mix of employees in the workforce 
is only the first step. In order to fully realise 
the associated benefits, inclusive business 
practices are also necessary to build on the 
diversity in the workforce. 	 	
This means ensuring that all employees 
in an organisation feel that they are 
treated fairly, respected and valued in the 
workplace. This is achieved through an 
active process of change and integration, 
adapting business practices and 
organisational behaviour to ensure that 
employees feel included.
 
From an employee perspective, the 2013 
Deloitte report 	Waiter, is that inclusion in 	
my soup? A new recipe to improve business 
performance	 found that employees are 	
twice as likely to feel engaged at work 
when their workplace is more diverse. This 
means that they are twice as likely to stay 
THE FUTURE OF WORK: HOW CAN WE ADAPT TO SURVIVE AND THRIVE?   51	
with their employer, advocate for their 
organisation and “go the extra mile” (i.e. the 
discretionary effort factor).
The report also found that a number of 
other business performance indicators 	
are significantly higher in organisations 
that are committed to providing a diverse 
and inclusive workplace, including team 
collaboration, innovation and performance. 
Importantly, the benefits associated with 	
FIGURE 8.1:	 EMPLOYEE PERSPECTIVES ON IMPACT OF DIVERSIT Y AND INCLUSION 	 88	
EMPLOYEE ENGAGEMENT	TEAM COLLABORATION	
High
Low	
Diversity	
1.20 x	2.01x	
1x	1.67x	
Low	High	Inc\busion	
THE UPLIF T	
High
Low	
Diversity	
1.29x	1.42 x	
1x	1.12 x	
Low	High	Inc\busion	
THE UPLIF T	
HIGH PERFORMING ORGANISATION	INNOVATION	
High
Low	
Diversity	
1.4 9 x	1.80 x	
1x	1.27x	
Low	High	Inc\busion	
THE UPLIF T	
Low	
Diversity	
1.50 x	1.8 3x	
1x	1.31x	
Low	High	Inc\busion	
THE UPLIF T	
THE END G\fAL	
High
future	[inc]  52	
a diverse workplace were often magnified	 	
when the organisation also had inclusive 
business practices.
As organisations continue to recognise 
the benefits associated with diversity 
and inclusion in the workplace, it is likely 
that business practices will continue to 	
evolve to better capture these benefits in 
the future. The employees of the future 
are likely to continue to benefit from the 
ongoing improvements in workplace 
diversity and inclusion over the coming 
years.	
CALL TO ACTION	
BUSINESSES:	  How will you foster collaboration and inclusiveness 	
in an increasingly diverse workforce?
POLICY MAKERS:	 Do we need new strategies for encouraging and 	
incentivising employers to invest in diversity? 
INDIVIDUALS:	 What are your unconscious biases? How can you 	
act to counter these?
THE FUTURE OF WORK: HOW CAN WE ADAPT TO SURVIVE AND THRIVE?   53
future	[in 
future	[in  
future	[in   54	
The workforce is becoming increasingly globalised, as trade 
barriers continue to be reduced around the world, and 
technological developments allow companies to operate 
beyond country borders. 
This globalisation has enabled businesses and employees to connect more easily across 
geographies, and has facilitated increased transactions at an international level.
There is a fear that this might lead to fewer 
local jobs in the domestic economy. Our 
survey shows that most employees value 
work-life balance and job security over 
financial success. Job security is more of a 	
concern for more experienced employees 
who have been in the workforce for more 
than 15 years; however, 40% of early-career 
workers still identify this as a concern.  
There is also a cautionary note for business. 	 	
FIGURE 9.1:	 TOP THREE RANKED CAREER GOALS	 89	
Work for a\b i\bspiri\bg leader
Have good work-life bala\bce	
Have a positive impact o\b societ y
Work i\b a collaborative orga\bisatio\b	
Broade\b my skills	
Be a\b exper t i\b o\be area	
A variet y of jobs
Move up the ladder	
Work with i\bdividuals with diverse backgrou\bds	
Job securit y	
Ru\b my ow\b busi\bess	
High i\bcome a\bd fi\ba\bcial success	
0 10  20 30 40  50	60	
PERCENTAGE	
 Ra\bked first   	 Ra\bked seco\bd   	 Ra\bked third
THE FUTURE OF WORK: HOW CAN WE ADAPT TO SURVIVE AND THRIVE?   55	
Although income is an important 
consideration for many, it is not the only 
thing that employees value. The ability 
to have a positive impact on society or 
broaden skills are also seen as important 
career goals.
There has been a significant rise in 
international services trade volumes, 
indicating that Australian employees are 
increasingly providing services to other 
countries, and overseas employees are 
increasingly involved in the provision of 
services to Australia. In this latter case, 
there has been particularly strong growth 
in computer and IT services purchased by 
Australians from abroad, with 2014 imports 	
being around 13 times higher than a couple 
of decades ago. 
This is consistent with the increase in 
offshoring activity by Australian and New 
Zealand firms across various industries 
over recent years, as discussed in the 2015 
future	[inc]	 paper 	What is the future for 	
offshoring	?90 The paper found that wider 	
adoption of technological advancements 
such as cloud computing, hosted virtual 
desktops, big data and enterprise mobility 
by businesses in recent years has helped 
to facilitate decisions on offshoring and 
locating parts of the workforce overseas.
Furthermore, this interaction between 
greater global economic integration and 
further technological advancements in 
the future will be increasingly important in 
driving offshoring over future years. 	
FIGURE 9.2:	 MULTIPLES OF GROW TH IN SERVICES TRADE BE T WEEN 1994 AND 2014	 91	
 	Services exports, i.e. Australia\b workers 
providi\bg ser vices to other cou\btries	 	Services imports , i.e. overseas workers 
providi\bg ser vices to Australia	
15x
12x
9x
\fx
3x
0x
 	Financia\b	 	Computer   
& IT	 	Professiona\b   
(inc\b. consu\bting)	 	 	Financia\b	 	Computer   
& IT	 	Professiona\b   
(inc\b. consu\bting)	 
future	[inc]  56	
The rise of the “virtual global worker” 	 	
has been highlighted as having the 
potential 	to significantly disrupt the labour 	
market.	92  It means that employees in the 	
Australian labour force will increasingly 
need to compete against talent from other 
countries in the future, while allowing 
Australian companies to access a much 
larger pool of global talent and putting 
downward pressure on wages. 
To compete in an environment where 
others may offer similar skills for a lower 
price, individuals will have to consider how 
to differentiate themselves. This may be 
through offering a unique combination 
of skills, a different perspective, strong 
personal brand, or a well-developed 
network. 
“We are CEOs of our own 
companies: Me Inc. To be 
in business today, our most 
important job is to be head 
marketer for the brand called 
Yo u”  	93	
The best opportunities will not necessarily 
come from an active job search. A 2014 	
survey of nearly 2,000 recruiters found that 
nearly half were recruiting candidates who 
were not actively searching for a job.	94 	
Passive recruiting is enabled in part by 
social media. Social media plays a big role 
in hiring more broadly: 93% of recruiters 
review a candidate’s social media profile 
before making a hiring decision. Although 
social media is a valuable tool, it is 
important to use it wisely. 	Over half of 	
recruiters have reconsidered a candidate 
after seeing their social media profile, 
with 61% of these reconsiderations being 
negative. 	95 	
The willingness of employees to relocate 
for 	employment reasons is expected to 	
remain high over future years. In particular, 
the global mobility of young employees 
could increase significantly. Already, the 
Millennial generation has been highlighted 
as being more mobile than previous 
generations, with one in four nominating 
global opportunities and experiences as 
the most important feature in the first 
five years of their career.	96  As this trend 	
continues to play out among those entering 
employment, the Australian workforce 
could become even more globally mobile 	 	
in the future. 	
CALL TO ACTION	
BUSINESSES:	  What opportunities and challenges are created by 	
access to a global labour force?
POLICY MAKERS:	 Are our immigration and industrial relations systems 	
sufficiently flexible and robust to accommodate a more global labour 
force?
INDIVIDUALS:	 How will you compete in a global employment 	
market? 	 	
What is your value proposition?
THE FUTURE OF WORK: HOW CAN WE ADAPT TO SURVIVE AND THRIVE?   CONCLUSION	
FUNDAMENTAL SHIFTS 	– IN OUR POPULATION, OUR 	
ECONOMIC AND PHYSICAL CONNECTIVITY, AND OUR 
TECHNOLOGY FRONTIER –	 ARE SHAPING OUR FUTURE. 	
The impacts are broad reaching, creating opportunities 
for new business models and social change, as well as 
challenges for policy frameworks and incumbents. 	 	
They are also driving change in the workplace and the 
labour force. 
Creative destruction means that technology will create 
new jobs, even as it destroys others. Skills, training and 
education are increasingly important; however, they can 
lose relevance quickly. Harnessing diversity and global	 	
mobility will be increasingly important to business success.
However, the nature of this change is not certain. Is it 
better to be a generalist or a specialist? Will someone 
be more successful if they follow a linear career path, or 
change industries and roles? Will tenure decrease as job 
mobility increases?
THE FUTURE OF WORK	 – and the pre-requisites for 	
success – will emerge over time. It is clear that we need 
to be ready and willing to adapt to new circumstances 
and learn new skills. Governments and businesses should 
consider how to leverage experience while providing 
pathways for re-training and education.
TO BEST ADAPT, SURVIVE, AND THRIVE	, WE NEED 	
TO DISCUSS AND RECONSIDER OUR ANSWERS TO 
A RANGE OF QUESTIONS THAT WILL SHAPE OUR 
POSITION IN THE WORKPLACE OF THE FUTURE.  58	
CALL TO ACTION – 	Questions for Individuals	
How will technology impact on your job? What skills will you need to 
succeed in a more automated economy?
How many careers will you have over your life?
Is it preferable to possess a specialised skillset or more generalist skills?
What types of education will be most valuable for you to pursue in the 
future?
To what extent are your goals and perceptions likely to change as your life 
circumstances change?
What are your unconscious biases? How can you act to counter these?
How will you compete in a global employment market? What is your 	 	
value proposition? 
What are the manual tasks that could be automated in your organisation? 
How will you ensure that the skills of your employees remain relevant and 
useful?
Do you currently have, or will you develop, a strategy to combat higher 
turnover? How will your business recruit and retain in a higher turnover 
environment?
What value could you get from considering applicants who have 
qualifications in other fields?
How will you support professional development and formal education 	 	
for your top talent?
Will you have strategies for attracting and retaining talent which are 
catered to different generations or stages of life?
How will you foster collaboration and inclusiveness in an increasingly 
diverse workforce?
What opportunities and challenges are created by access to a global 	 	
labour force?	
CALL TO ACTION – 	Questions for business
THE FUTURE OF WORK: HOW CAN WE ADAPT TO SURVIVE AND THRIVE?   59	
charteredaccountantsanz.c\Lom/futureinc	
How will you equip and enable those whose jobs are destroyed to continue 
in employment?
What are the institutional barriers to employment mobility?
How does school education provide transferable skills? Is the balance 
between generalist and specialist training right? How do we provide 
education which is agile enough to keep pace with changing needs?
Should government play a role in funding ongoing education? Are there 
certain individuals or forms of education that should be given priority?
What is your role in bridging the gap between perceptions and reality?
Do we need new strategies for encouraging and incentivising employers to 
invest in diversity? 
Are our immigration and industrial relations systems sufficiently flexible 
and robust to accommodate a more global labour force?	
CALL TO ACTION – 	Questions for policy makers
future	[inc]  60
REFERENCES	
1. 	De\boitte Access Economics (2015) Ca\bcu\bations 
based on ABS 5206.0 Tab\be 2 (2015) and ABS 
5204.0 Tab\be 36 (2015).	
2. 	De\boitte Access Economics (2013) 	The Connected 	
Workplace – War for talent in the di\fital 
economy.	
3. 	De\boitte Access Economics (2015) 	The economic 	
contri\butions of Australia’s research universities – 
the UNSW example. 	
4. 	De\boitte Access Economics (2015) Survey resu\bts.	
5. 	 i\bid	.	
6. 	Meat and Livestock Austra\bia (2015) 	Monthly 	
export statistics – Major Markets – China.	 	
Accessed 8 December 2015 from 	http://www.	
m\ba.com.au/Prices-markets/Overseas-markets/
Greater	-China	
7. 	Chartered Accountants Austra\bia and New 
Zea\band (2015) 	China’s Australasian food\bowl. 	
Issue 14, Acuity	, September 2015. 	
8. 	BCG (2014) 	Decodin\f Glo\bal Talent.	 Accessed 	
17 November 2015 from 	https://www.	
bcgperspectives.com/content/artic\bes/human_
resources_\beadership_decoding_g\boba\b_ta\bent	/ 	
9. 	Commonwea\bth of Austra\bia (2015) We\bcome to 
the ideas boom: 	Supportin\f innovation throu\fh 	
visas.	 Accessed 14 December 2015 from 	h t t p: //	
www.innovation.gov.au/system/fi\bes/case-
study/Factsheet	\f2021\f20-\f20Supporting\f20	
innovation\f20through\f	20visas.pdf	
10.  	De\boitte (2015) 	Mo\bile Consumer Survey 2015 – 	
the Australian Cut. 	
11. 	NSW Department of Industry (undated) Invest 
in NSW – 	Success Stories – Drop\box.	 Accessed 	
25 November 2015 from 	http://www.industry.	
nsw.gov.au/invest-in-nsw/invest-case-studies/
dropbox	 	
12.  	De\boitte (2015) 	Buildin\f the Lucky Country #5: 	
The purpose of place – Reconsidered 	
13. 	Department of Industry, Tourism and Resources. 
(2006) 	Colla\boration and other factors influencin\f 	
innovation novelty in Australian \businesses. 	
14.  	Gens\ber (2013) 	2013 U.S. Workplace Survey	. 	
Accessed 20 January 2016 from 	http://www.	
gens\ber.com/doc/survey	-2013-u-s-workp\bace-	
sur vey.	
15. 	De\boitte Access Economics (2012) 	Buildin\f the 	
Lucky Country #2 – Di\fital Disruption: Short Fuse, 	 	
Bi\f Ban\f?	
16.  	 i\bid.	
17. 	De\boitte Access Economics (2014) 	Buildin\f the 	
Lucky Country #3 – Positionin\f for prosperity? 
Catchin\f the next wave. 	
18.  	De\boitte Access Economics (2015) 	Di\fital 	
Government Transformation.	
19. 	 i\bid.	
20. 	 i\bid.	
21. 	IMF (2004) Wor\bd Economic Out\book: 	The Glo\bal 	
Demo\fraphic Transition. Septem\ber 2004.	 	
22. 	United Nations Department of Economic and 
Socia\b Affairs (2015) 	Profiles of A\fein\f: 2015	 	
Accessed 7 December 2015 from 	h t t p: //e s a.	
un.org/unpd/popdev/Profi\besofageing2015/index.
htm\b	
23. 	Ga\b\bup (2014) 	Business leaders say knowled\fe 	
trumps colle\fe pedi\free.	 Accessed 28 December 	
2015 from 	http://www.ga\b\bup.com/po\b\b/167546/	
business-\beaders-say-know\bedge-trumps-
co\b\bege-pedigree.aspx	 	
24.  	ABS (2015) 6283.0 – 	Retirement and Retirement 	
Intentions	, Austra\bia, Ju\by 2012 to June 2013. 	
25. 	De\boitte Access Economics (2012) 	Increasin\f 	
participation amon\f older employees: The \frey 
army advances.
THE FUTURE OF WORK: HOW CAN WE ADAPT TO SURVIVE AND THRIVE?   61	
26. 	Austra\bian Human Rights Commission (2015) 
National prevalence survey of a\fe discrimination 
in the workplace 2015.	 Accessed 8 December 	
2015 from 	https://www.humanrights.gov.au/our-	
work/age-discrimination/pub\bications/nationa\b	-	
preva\bence-survey-age-discrimination-workp\bace	
2 7. 	Austra\bian Human Rights Commission (2012) 
Workin\f past our 60s: reformin\f laws and 
policies	. Accessed 28 December 2015 from 	
https://www.humanrights.gov.au/pub\bications/
working	-past-our-60s-reforming-\baws-and-	
po\bicies-2012	
28. 	Maritz A, Zo\bin R, De Waa\b A, Fisher R, Perenyi 
A and Eager B (2015) Senior entrepreneurship in 
Austra\bia: Active ageing and extending working 
\bives. 	International Journal of Or\fanizational 	
Innovation	, 1 – 39.	
29. 	 i\bid.	
30. 	Sand\ber Training (2015) 	Portrait of successful 	
\business founder revealed	. Accessed 7 December 	
2015 from 	http://www.uk.sand\ber.com/	
pressitems/show/13340/1058	
31.  	Kauffman Foundation (2009) 	The Anatomy of 	
an Entrepreneur	. Accessed 3 December 2015 	
from 	http://www.kauffman.org/what-we-	
do/research/2010/05/the	-anatomy-of-an-	
entrepreneur	
32. 	Maritz A, Zo\bin R, De Waa\b A, Fisher R, Perenyi 
A and Eager B (2015) Senior entrepreneurship in 
Austra\bia: Active ageing and extending working 
\bives. 	International Journal of Or\fanizational 	
Innovation	, 1 – 39.	
33. 	Asia-Pacific Banking and Finance (2015) 
Consumers switchin\f to sharin\f economy	. 	
Accessed 10 December 2015 from 	http://www.	
austra\bianbankingfinance.com/techno\bogy/
consumers	-switching-to-sharing-economy/	
34. 	  i\bid.	
35. 	Nie\bsen (2014) 	Is sharin\f the new \buyin\f? 	
Reputation and trust are emer\fin\f as new 
currencies	. Accessed 2 December 2015 from 	
http://www.nie\bsen.com/content/dam/
nie\bseng\boba\b/apac/docs/reports/2014/Nie\bsen-
G\boba\b-Share-Community-Report.pdf	 	
36. 	 i\bid.	
3 7. 	TechCrunch (2015) 	The Battle Is For the Customer 	
Interface	. Accessed 13 November 2015 from 	
http://techcrunch.com/2015/03/03/in	-the-age-	
of-disintermediation-the-batt\be-is-a\b\b-for-the-
customer-interface/#.nvp\b096:0sCd	
38. 	Dawson R (2015) 	What is the Future of Work? 	
Future Proofin\f the Profession	, Chartered 	
Accountants Austra\bia and New Zea\band. 	
39. 	Business Insider (2015) 	Leaked charts show how 	
U\ber’s driver ratin\f system works	, 12 February. 	
Accessed 11 November 2015 from 	http://www.	
businessinsider.com.au/\beaked	-charts-show-	
how-ubers-driver-rating-system-works-2015-2	
40. 	Nie\bsen (2014) 	Is sharin\f the new \buyin\f?	 	
Reputation and trust are emerging as new 
currencies. Accessed 2 December 2015 
from 	http://www.nie\bsen.com/content/dam/	
nie\bseng\boba\b/apac/docs/reports/2014/Nie\bsen-
G\boba\b-Share-Community-Report.pdf	
41. 	 i\bid.	
42. 	MYOB (2015) 	How artificial intelli\fence will 	
chan\fe the future of \business	. Accessed 22 	
October 2015 from 	http://myob.com.au/myob/	
news	-1258090872838?artic\beId=1441882095010	
43. 	De\boitte Access Economics (2015) Survey resu\bts. 	
44. 	Frey C B and Osborne M A (2013) 	The future 	
of employment: how suscepti\ble are jo\bs to 
computerisation	. Accessed 20 January 2016 from 	
http://www.oxfordmartin.ox.ac.uk /down\boads/
academic/ The_Future_of_Emp\boyment.pdf
future	[inc]  62	
45. 	De\boitte Access Economics (2015) Survey resu\bts.	
46. 	De\boitte (2015) 	Technolo\fy and people: The \freat 	
jo\b-creatin\f machine	. Accessed 11 November 	
2015 from 	http://www2.de\boitte.com/content/	
dam/De\boitte/uk /Documents/finance/de\boitte-uk-
techno\bogy-and-peop\be.pdf	 	
4 7. 	 i\bid.	
48. 	 i\bid.	
49. 	Rid\bey M (2014) 	No need to fear the hi-tech 	
jo\bs massacre	. Accessed 11 November 2015 	
from 	http://www.thetimes.co.uk/tto/opinion/	
co\bumnists/artic\be4035395.ece	 	
50. 	Edureka (2015) 	10 Reasons Why \bi\f Data 	
Analytics is the Best Career Move	. Accessed 12 	
November 2015 from 	http://www.edureka.co/	
b\bog/10	-reasons-why-big-data-ana\bytics-is-the-	
best-career-move 	
51.  	Goos M and Manning A (2007) Lousy and \bove\by 
jobs: The rising po\barization of work in Britain. 
The review of economics and statistics	, 89(1), 	
118-133.	
52. 	Autor D H (2015) Why are there sti\b\b so many 
jobs? The history and future of workp\bace 
automation. 	The Journal of Economic 	
Perspectives	, 29(3), 3-30.	
53. 	OECD (1998) 	Technolo\fy, Productivity and Jo\b 	
Creation: Best Policy practices – Hi\fhli\fhts	 	
54. 	Sa\bmon K (2015) 	The Future of Work in New 	
Zealand: Education and Trainin\f – Lessons from 
Denmark	
55. 	De\boitte Access Economics (2015) Survey resu\bts. 	
56. 	 i\bid.	
5 7.  	ABS (2013) 6209.0 – Labour Mobi\bity, February 
2013. 	
58. 	D’Arcy P, Gustafsson L, Lewis C and Wi\btshire T 
(2012) Labour Market Turnover and Mobi\bity, 	RBA 	
Bulletin	 December Quarter 2012	
59. 	De\boitte Access Economics (2013) 	The Connected 	
Workplace – War for talent in the di\fital 
economy	.	
60. 	AHRI (2015) AHRI Pu\bse Survey: 	Turnover and 	
Retention	. Accessed 10 November 2015 from 	
https://www.ahri.com.au/__data/assets/
pdf_fi\be/0018/52344/PULSE_retention-and-
turnover-2015.pdf	/ 	
61. 	McKinsey G\boba\b Institute (2015) 	A la\bour market 	
that works: connectin\f talent with opportunity in 
the di\fital a\fe	. 	
62. 	McCrind\be (2014) Job Mobi\bity in Austra\bia. 
Accessed 10 November 2015 from 	h t t p: //	
mccrind\be.com.au/the-mccrind\be-b\bog/job	-	
mobi\bity-in-austra\bia 	
63. 	ABS (2015) 6291.0.55.003 – Labour Force, 
Austra\bia, Detai\bed, Quarter\by, Aug 2015	
64. 	D’Arcy P, Gustafsson L, Lewis C and Wi\btshire T 
(2012) 	La\bour market turnover and mo\bility	, RBA 	
Bu\b\betin December Quarter 2012.	
65. 	ABS (2015) 6291.0 – Emp\boyed persons by 
Number of months and years with current 
emp\boyer or in own business.	
66. 	De\boitte Access Economics (2015) Survey resu\bts.	
6 7.  	Janda M (2013) 	Avera\fe retirement a\fe risin\f 	
as Australians live lon\fer, Australian Bureau of 
Statistics fi\fures show	. Accessed 18 December 	
2015 from 	http://www.abc.net.au/news/2013-12-	
10/figures-show-retirement-age-rising-with-\bife-
expectancy/5146928	  	
68. 	De\boitte Access Economics (2015) Survey resu\bts.	
69. 	 i\bid.	
70. 	ICAEW (2015) 	Skills and productivity: A finance & 	
mana\fement report	.	
71.  	DIISRTE (2012) 	Australian Small Business: Key 	
Statistics and Analysis.
THE FUTURE OF WORK: HOW CAN WE ADAPT TO SURVIVE AND THRIVE?   63	
72. 	PageGroup (2013) 	Businesses are dilutin\f 	
workers’ specialist skills.	 Accessed 11 November 	
2015 from 	http://www.michae\bpage.co.uk /news-	
and-research/media-re\beases/businesses	-are-	
di\buting-workers-specia\bist-ski\b\bs 	
73. 	Karaniko\bas E (2013) 	Industry policy in an open 	
economy	. Accessed 16 November 2015 from 	
http://www.aph.gov.au/About_Par\biament/
Par\biamentary_Departments/Par\biamentary_
Library/pubs/BriefingBook44p/IndustryPo\bicy	 	
74. 	ABS (2015) 6291.0.55.003 – Labour Force, 
Austra\bia, Detai\bed, Quarter\by, Aug 2015.	
75. 	ABS (2014) 6227.0 – Education and Work, 
Austra\bia, May 2014.	
76. 	 i\bid.	
7 7. 	De\boitte Access Economics (2015) Survey resu\bts.	
78. 	 i\bid.	
79. 	ABS (2015) 6227.0 – Education and Work, 
Austra\bia, May 2015, Tab\be 1.4.	
80. 	Department of Education and Training (undated) 
Skills for education and employment	. Accessed 4 	
January 2016 from 	https://www.education.gov.	
au/ski\b\bs	-education-and-emp\boyment	
81.  	Austra\bian Government (undated) 	Skills and 	
Trainin\f Initiative	. Accessed 4 January 2016 	
from 	http://www.business.gov.au/grants-and-	
assistance/growth-fund/Ski\b\bs-Training-Initiative/
Pages/defau\bt.aspx	
82. 	ICVET (2006) 	Desi\fnin\f Professional 	
Development for the Knowled\fe Era	. Accessed 	
16 November 2015 from 	http://\brrpub\bic.c\bi.det.	
nsw.edu.au/\brrSecure/Sites/ Web/13289/ezine/
year_2006/ju\b_aug/documents/ha\b\b_icvet.pdf	
83. 	Smo\ba K W and Sutton C D (2002) Generationa\b 
differences: Revisiting generationa\b work va\bues 
for the new mi\b\bennium. 	Journal of or\fanizational 	
\behavior	, 23(SPI), 363 – 382.	
84. 	De\boitte Access Economics (2015) Survey resu\bts. 	
85. 	Twenge J M, Campbe\b\b S M, Hoffman, B J 
and Lance C E (2010) Generationa\b differences 
in work va\bues: Leisure and extrinsic va\bues 
increasing, socia\b and intrinsic va\bues decreasing. 
Journal of Mana\fement	, 36(5), 1117 – 1142.	
86. 	De\boitte Access Economics (2015) Survey resu\bts.	
8 7. 	Herring C (2009) Does diversity pay?: 	Race, 	
\fender, and the \business case for diversity.	 	
American Socio\bogica\b Review 74(2) 208-224.	
88. 	De\boitte (2013) 	Waiter, is that inclusion in 	
my soup?	 A new recipe to improve business 	
performance.	
89. 	De\boitte Access Economics (2015) Survey resu\bts. 	
90. 	Chartered Accountants Austra\bia and New 
Zea\band (2015) 	What is the future for offshorin\f?	
91. 	ABS (2015) 5368.0 – Internationa\b Trade in Goods 
and Services, Austra\bia, Sep 2015	
92. 	F YA (2015) 	The new work order: Ensurin\f youn\f 	
Australians have skills and experience for the jo\bs 
of the future, not the past	.	
93. 	Peters T, (1997) 	The Brand Called You	, Fast 	
Company Magazine. Accessed 4 January 2016 
from 	http://www.fastcompany.com/28905/	
brand	-ca\b\bed-you	
94. 	Jobvite (2014) 	Social Recruitin\f Survey	. Accessed 	
4 January 2016 from 	https://www.jobvite.	
com/wp-content/up\boads/2014/10/Jobvite_
Socia\bRecruiting_Survey2014.pdf	
95. 	 i\bid.	
96. 	AIESEC (2015) 	Improvin\f the journey from 	
education to employment: YouthSpeak survey 
millennial insi\fht report
future	[inc]  charteredaccountantsanz.c\Lom/futureinc 