Extreme automation and connectivity:  
The global, regional, and investment  
implications of the Fourth Industrial Revolution
January 2016
UBS White Paper for the World Economic Forum  
Annual Meeting 2016  World  
Economic  
Forum 3	
Foreword
The global economy is on the cusp of profound changes that are com- 
parable in magnitude to the advent of the first industrial revolution, 
the development of assembly line production, or the invention of the	 
micro-chip. Technological advances are permitting ever greater levels 
of automation. Meanwhile, the near universal ownership of smart devices  
in many parts of the world is leading to a degree of interconnectedness 
that was previously unimaginable. 
These developments, which we believe are part of a technology-driven 
Fourth Industrial Revolution, have significant implications for investors, 
the global economy and the relative competitiveness of developed and 
emerging nations. Thus, these changes are an interesting and impor-  
tant topic for discussion at the World Economic Forum. 
In this White Paper, we have tried to put recent technological shifts in 
a broader historical context. Previous industrial revolutions have been 
driven by rapid advances in automation and connectivity, starting with 
the technologies that launched the First Industrial Revolution in 18th 
  century England through to the exponential increases in computing power 
of recent decades. The Fourth Industrial Revolution is based on the same 
two forces. The first is extreme automation, the product of a growing role 
for robotics and artificial intelligence in business, government and private 
life. The second, extreme connectivity, annihilates distance and time 
as obstacles to ever deeper, faster communication between and among 
humans and machines.
These changes will have very different effects on nations, businesses and 
individuals. Automation will continue to put downward pressure on 
the wages of the low skilled and is starting to impinge on the employment 
prospects of middle skilled workers. By contrast the potential returns to 
highly skilled and more adaptable workers are increasing. Among corpo­
rations, a wide range of traditional businesses – especially those that act 
as intermediaries – can be expected to suffer. Many labor ­intensive firms 
should be able to boost profit margins as they substitute costly workers 
for cheaper robots or intelligent software. And a range of entirely new 
companies and sectors will spring into existence. For nations, the largest 
gains from the Fourth Industrial Revolution are likely to be captured by 
those with the most flexible economies, adding a further incentive for 
governments to trim red tape and barriers to business.  4	
At UBS we believe in embracing change, rather than fighting it. Our technol­
ogy lab in London, established in early 2015, is already exploring a range of 
innovations. These include blockchain, the shared ledger system that under-
pins Bitcoin and offers the potential to enhance transparency and trust, 
while reducing transaction costs. In addition, the UBS Future of Finance Chal -
lenge aims to identify disruptive ideas and support their commercialization. 
Last year’s competition drew 600 participants from 52 countries. 
In the same vein, we hope this White Paper will stimulate debate as well 
as offering useful insights into the forces that are reshaping global business. 
Your sincerely,
Axel A. Weber  Sergio P. Ermotti 
Chairman of the  Group Chief 
Board of Directors  Executive Officer
World Economic Forum  5	
Authors
Bhanu Baweja, Head of Emerging Market Cross­Asset Strategy, UBS Investment Bank
Paul Donovan,  Deputy Head of Global Economics, UBS Investment Bank
Mark Haefele,  Global Chief Investment Officer, UBS Wealth Management & UBS Wealth Management Americas
Lutfey Siddiqi,  Global Head, Emerging Markets FX, Rates, and Credit, UBS Investment Bank
Simon Smiles,  Chief Investment Officer – UHNW, UBS Wealth Management
With thanks to
Matthew Carter
Kiran Ganesh
Josh Holcroft
Marco Spinelli
Christopher Swann 6
Contents /   
Executive Summary	
P. 10   1. A brief history of industrial revolutions 	
• Prior industrial revolutions have centered around improvements in automation  
and connectivity.
•  The First Industrial Revolution introduced early automation through machinery,  
and boosted intra-national connections through the building of bridges and  
railways.
•  The Second Industrial Revolution began when automation enabled mass   production	 
and fostered more efficient, productive connectivity via the division of labor.	
•  The Third Industrial Revolution was propelled by the rise of the digital age, of more 	
sophisticated automation, and of increasing connectivity between and within 
humanity and the natural world.
•  The Fourth Industrial Revolution is being driven by extreme automation and  
connectivity. A special feature of the Fourth Industrial Revolution will be the wider	 
implementation of artificial intelligence.	
P. 14   2. What are the potential global economic consequences? 	
• Polarization of the labor force as low ­skill jobs continue to be automated an this   
trend increasingly spreads to middle ­skill jobs. This implies higher potential levels of 
inequality in the short ­run, and a need for labor market flexibility to   harness Fourth 
Industrial Revolution benefits in the long ­run.
•  Greater returns accruing to those with already ­high savings rates. In the   short run,  
this could exacerbate inequality via relatively lower borrowing costs and higher asset 
valuations.
•  As the issuer of the world’s reserve currency, the US’ competitive advantages, sitting   
at the heart of the Fourth Industrial Revolution, could tighten effective monetary   
conditions among US dollar ­linked economies. 
•  The Fourth Industrial Revolution increases the magnitude and probability of tail risks 
related to cybersecurity and geopolitics, but may spur regional action to invest and 
embrace Fourth Industrial Revolution benefits.
World Economic Forum  P. 21  3. Who will be the regional winners and losers? 	
• “Flexibility” will be key to success in the Fourth Industrial Revolution; economies  
with the most flexible labor markets, educational systems, infrastructure, and legal 
systems are likely to be relative beneficiaries. 
•  Developed economies are likely to be relative winners at this stage, whereas  
developing economies face greater challenges as their abundance of low ­skill labor 
ceases to be an advantage and becomes more of a headwind. 
•  Emerging markets in their demographic prime may find that extreme automation  
displaces low ­skill workers, but that their limited technology infrastructures do not 
allow them to reap the full benefits of extreme connectivity.	
P. 28   4. What are the investment consequences? 	
• Given current assessments of relative competitiveness, emerging markets may  
be less well placed to profit from Fourth Industrial Revolution benefits, relative to 
developed markets.
•  We expect further disruption to traditional industries from extreme automation  
and connectivity. 
•  Big data beneficiaries include firms that harness big data to cut costs or target sales; 
firms that automate big data analysis, and firms that keep big data secure.
•  Blockchain applications could benefit firms that use them to automate processes 
securely, to cut out costly intermediaries, and to protect intellectual property.
7 8
Automation and Connectivity
 Industrial  
 Revolutions	
mechanical production
mass production  steam power energy
electrical energy	
2	
nd	
1	
st	
1870
17 8 4
World Economic Forum  9	
electronics 
artificial intelligence  IT
big data	
3	
rd	
4	
th	
19 69
To d a y 10
1. A brief history  
of industrial revolutions 
We have characterized the prior three industrial revolutions 
using the timeline proposed by Nicholas Davis, the World 
Economic Forum’s Head of Society and Innovation. Our cen-
tral view is that all industrial revolutions involve advances 
in two fields – automation and connectivity.
The First Industrial Revolution
The First Industrial Revolution ushered in early automation 
via machinery, in lieu of agricultural inputs. 1784 saw 
Henry Cort’s invention in England of the “puddling” process 
that turned pig iron into wrought iron. This was seen 
by economic historians as a key inflexion point of the First 
Industrial Revolution, marking the beginnings of automation. 
Mechanization became a key element of economic devel -
opment, leading to a profound split between the East and 
West that has only recently started to converge.
Manufacturing progress and the nascent use of higher 
energy-intensive fuels such as coal and petrol followed, 
paving the way for steam power and locomotives. This in 
turn spurred both a connectivity revolution via wider travel, 
and a surge in the construction of infrastructure projects, 
including bridges, tunnels, aqueducts, and ports. We also 
note that an agricultural revolution supported by the inclu -
sion of crop rotation and selective breeding boosted farm 
productivity and helped contain the costs of labor-intensive 
foodstuffs. The Second Industrial Revolution
The Second Industrial Revolution (typically seen by historians 
as beginning around 1870, the second half of the “long 
19th century”) was characterized by three factors: higher 
levels of automation via the development of mass produc
-
tion; more efficient connectivity in production via the divi -
sion of labor; and further progress in the use of energy 
sources such as electricity and petroleum.
While at first the Second Industrial Revolution was limited to 
“within company” supply chains, automation and connec -
tivity gains allowed supply chains to evolve into the complex 
systems we know today. These supply chains rapidly 
expanded across different firms and, increasingly, between 
different nations. Automation also contributed to a second 
agricultural revolution by boosting agricultural yields via 
industrial fertilizer production, and by introducing more 
productive food storage methods through refrigeration.
Standardization was one of the key drivers of these achieve­
ments, including of quality standards (for example, within 
trade blocks) and transportation systems (for instance, the 
shipping container). Legal and trade protections were also 
needed to assure innovators that they would be able to enjoy 
the financial rewards of their creativity, without being 
exposed to early competition from rivals copying their tech -
nologies. 	
Prior industrial revolutions have centered around improvements 
in automation and connectivity.
The First Industrial Revolution introduced early automation 
through machinery and boosted intra-national connections 
through the building of bridges and railways.
The Second Industrial Revolution began when automation 
  enabled mass production and fostered more efficient,   productive 
connectivity via the division of labor.
World Economic Forum  The concept of the corporation was key to this. In the 
absence of this integrated entity, the high transaction costs 
involved in individuals contracting every single economic 
interaction would have restrained profit growth, and heavy 
capital goods could never have achieved economies of scale. 
The Third Industrial Revolution
The rise of the digital age characterized the Third Industrial 
Revolution. 1969 was the year in which connectivity took 
a leap forward, with the first message sent over ARPANET, 
the forebear of today’s Internet. Equally, the scope for 
automation was vastly enhanced by the implications of 
Moore’s Law – the observation that the number of transistors	 	
on an integrated circuit has doubled approximately every 
two years. This advancing automation coupled with the 
growing appreciation of the environmental damage caused 
by more intensive farming led, from an agricultural revolu-
tion perspective, to the rise of a “green revolution.”
Moore’s Law generally refers directly to electronic circuitry, 
the foundational technology of this era. It captures the 
wider phenomenon of output growing as an exponential 
function of input. Moore’s Law resulted in greater comput ­ 
ing power and the ability to automate ever more complex 
tasks. In some areas, such as biotechnology, the pace of 
progress has even exceeded Moore’s Law. 	
The Third Industrial Revolution was propelled by the rise of the 
digital age, of more sophisticated automation, and of increasing 
connectivity between and within humanity and the natural world. 12	
The Fourth Industrial Revolution is being driven by extreme 
automation and connectivity. A special feature of the Fourth 
Industrial Revolution will be the wider implementation of  
artificial intelligence.	
1 We note that the need for lower-skilled,  
relatively lower-paid labor to provide  
sufficient affordable food may intensify.	  
Coupled with growing environmental  	
concerns, this factor may spur a fourth 	 
agricultural revolution, in line with  
historical experience.	
Take, for example, the cost of sequencing a genome, which 
has fallen from as high as USD 100,000 in 2001 to USD 
5,000 last year to USD 1,400 today. The concept of crossing 
the chasm recognizes the gap between the early adopters 
of new technology and an early majority who play 
“c a t c h - u p”	 as later adopters. This chasm is most easily 
bridged by continuous innovation, allowing minimal disrup -
tion to the consumer. Advances in computing set the stage 
f	
 or the Fourth Industrial Revolution in three broad areas, 
according to the WEF’s Davis: the “technosphere” or digital 
world; the natural world that technology now allows us to 
monitor, analyze and digitize; and the human world, as 
technology impacts the way in which we connect and with 
whom we connect (human & machine, human & human, 
machine & machine).	
The Fourth Industrial Revolution
The Fourth Industrial Revolution is being driven by extreme 
automation and extreme connectivity. Extreme automation	 
will, as a first step, expand the range of jobs it is possible  	
to automate, to include not only highly repetitive low-skill 
jobs, but also highly routine medium-skill jobs. As we out-
line in the next section, the relative impact of this extreme 
automation on income inequality between low-skill and 
high-skill labor looks set to intensify	1. 	
We expect artificial intelligence (AI) to be a pervasive 
 f
 eature of the Fourth Industrial Revolution. Extreme auto -
mation via AI will increasingly automate some of the skills 
that formerly only humans possessed. Where AI could be	 
poised to make the biggest gains is in big data processing, 
World Economic Forum  13	
potentially including the processing of language and images, 
which have thus far been off-limits for computers to under	
-	
stand. Extreme automation could allow more robots and 	 	
AI to produce output, analyze results, make complex deci-
sions, and adapt conclusions to environmental factors.
Extreme connectivity enables more universal, global and 
close-to-instant communication. It is giving rise to new 
business models and is opening up economic supply in 
ways previously not possible. Indeed, the creation of Uber, 
the taxi-hailing smartphone app, was only made possible 
by the explosive increase in portable Internet-enabled 
devises. Supply effectively created its own demand.  
Services like Facebook, WhatsApp, Pinterest, Snapchat, 
Twitter, and Instagram have come to play a pivotal  
role in the social interaction of citizens around the world.	
Extreme automation can also be coupled with extreme 
connectivity, allowing computing systems to control and 
manage physical processes and respond in ever more 
“human” ways. This represents a democratization of the 
ability to communicate between and among governments, 
corporates, humans, and machines. The advent of 
“cyber-physical systems” may allow robots and AI, via 
extreme automation and connectivity, to “cross the chasm” 
between the technosphere, the natural world, and the 
human world.
A number of radical implications may arise from the Fourth 
Industrial Revolution. We shall now look at how extreme 
automation and extreme connectivity may impact the 
global macroeconomy, regional economies, and investment 
opportunities. 2. What are the potential global 
consequences?	
Polarization of the labor force as low­skill jobs continue to be 
automated, and this trend increasingly spreads to middle ­skill 
jobs. This implies higher potential levels of inequality in the 
short ­run, and a need for labor market flexibility to harness 
Fourth Industrial Revolution benefits in the long ­run.
Greater returns accruing to those with already­ high savings 
rates. In the short-run, this could exacerbate inequality via  
relatively lower borrowing costs and higher asset valuations.	
A polarized labor force 
While technological revolutions often stoke fears of declin -
ing employment as “robots do all the work,” we believe a 
decline in aggregate employment is unlikely. As we discuss 
in our assessment of regional winners and losers, the attri -
butes of the Fourth Industrial Revolution – extreme auto -
mation and particularly extreme connectivity – could 
improve the productivity of existing jobs or create demand 
for entirely new jobs. It is usually difficult to envision today 
what the jobs of the future might be. But we believe that 
extreme automation and extreme connectivity could 
  actually increase demand for customized “human” work.  That is not to say we will not see an impact on relative dif
-
ferences in regional labor forces in the short ­run. Low ­skill 
employment will likely continue to contract, and an increas -
ing range of middle ­skill jobs will become vulnerable as 
extreme automation is rolled out. While aggregate employ -
ment is unlikely to fall in the long ­run, we could start to see 
polarization in the labor force and frictional unemployment 
until workers reskill, relocate or alternatively adapt. Addi -
tionally, labor-intensive goods could see their prices fall relative 
to more capital-intensive goods. 
Some of the low ­skilled parts of the labor force (for instance, 
assembly line work) that have already been heavily affected 
by basic automation could be further impacted. The advent 
of “cobots,” or collaborative robots, which are able to “move 
around” and interact without the need for fixed positions, 
have the potential to work at a higher rate of production 
relative to that of lower ­skilled human workers. The greatest 
disruption, however, could be experienced by workers who 
have so far felt immune to robotic competition, namely those 
in middle ­skill professions.
World Economic Forum  15	
As the issuer of the world’s reserve currency, the US’ 
competitive advantages, sitting at the heart of the Fourth 
Industrial Revolution, could tighten effective monetary 
conditions among US dollar­linked economies. 	
We expect developments in extreme automation and 	 	
extreme connectivity, blended in AI solutions, to have a 
  significant impact on the nature of knowledge work. 
Automation will initially affect clerical work, sales, cus	
-	
tomer    service, and support functions. Robotic process 
 
automation, automatic reporting, and virtual assistants will 
become common. Minor claims in insurance could be 
processed without human intervention, most incoming 
customer    queries answered automatically, and many 	
 	
customer calls deflected. In finance, “robo ­advisors” are 
already available in the market. In the legal world, computers	 
can quickly go through millions of emails and dramatically 
cut the cost of investigations. And if fewer people are 
employed in a sector, fewer managers will likely be needed 
in that sector.	
This combination could force a broad swath of workers to 
adapt. Lower ­skilled and middle ­skilled workers may face 
greater unemployment in the near term unless a number of 
criteria are met, allowing them to reskill into tasks that 
extreme automation cannot perform, or move into industries  where extreme connectivity permits them to work outside 
of traditional global or regional boundaries. Equally, higher- 
skilled workers, particularly those who do routine tasks, 
may face future threats from the developments in advanced 
artificial intelligence such as natural language processing. 	
Once again, we do not expect the Fourth Industrial 	 	
Revolution to result in an aggregate increase in global 
unemployment; however we do examine, in our regional 
section below, which countries may be best placed 
shor t-term to harness fully extreme automation and con	
-	
nectivity benefits.
Higher savings at the top 
Near
­term polarization in the labor force and greater income 
inequality imply larger gains for those at the top of the 
income, skills and wealth spectrums. These individuals are 
likely to be best placed from a skills perspective to harness 
extreme automation and connectivity; they typically already 
have high savings rates and will benefit from holding more 
of the assets whose value will be boosted by the Fourth 
Industrial Revolution. And the pattern may not be limited to individuals. The Fourth 
Industrial Revolution can be characterized by relatively low 
capital intensity via deployment of extreme automation and 
connectivity. Put another way, the prototype company in 
the Fourth Industrial Revolution may enjoy a small human 
capital pool, but a large economic value, either private or 
in equity market capitalization. An example from our 2015 
whitepaper on “The New Global Context”: WhatsApp 
  generated impressive returns for a small group of founders 
and investors when Facebook agreed to pay what ended 
up being USD 22 billion for the company in February 2014, 
despite the fact that the firm had only 55 employees. By 
contrast, US airline United Continental has a similar market 
capitalization as of mid­December 2015 of around USD 
22 billion, but around 82,300 employees. The USD 400 mil -
lion of enterprise value per person garnered by WhatsApp is	 
an extreme example, but it highlights the possible outsized 
gains and inequality that may arise from low capital-inten -
sity business models of the future.	
Even in low capital-intensity businesses, the capital goods	 	
that are employed – that perhaps used to suffer from 
“asset specificity” – are now divisible into smaller and	
 	
more accessible units of usage, as exemplified by AirBnB	  and Uber. The growing use of the Internet of Things and 
extreme connectivity allows these more accessible units to 
be monitored and their efficiency evaluated in real time. 
(The October release from AirDNA, a data analytics com	
-	
pany that aggregates AirBnB listing data, may be one 
example.) 
As such, investments by firms benefiting from the Fourth 
Industrial Revolution may become more efficient and, over 
time, less burdensome in terms of capital deployed. Con­
sequently, even companies who invest heavily may often 
be able to fund these investments out of earnings, without 
the need to borrow. In this regard, it perhaps should not 
be regarded as a coincidence that many tech giants run 
such large cash surpluses, in sharp contrast to the capital-in	
-	
tensive investment cycle of many basic resources funds.
Eventually, as we highlight later on, flexibility of capital and	 
infrastructure may balance out some of this capital inequal -	
ity. Yet early adopters of extreme automation and connec	-	
tivity may enjoy lower borrowing costs in the short run, and 
put downward pressure on interest rates in parts of the 
economy where they operate. This is likely to drive up asset 
valuations of Fourth Industrial Revolution beneficiaries and 
further widen inequality levels.
The dollar dilemma 
As we highlight in the regional analysis of this paper, the 
United States possesses many of the key attributes neces-
sary for success in the Fourth Industrial Revolution. While 
technology is ultimately universal, economic structures 
tend to exacerbate differences between regions in the 
short run. 
While the United States faces a variety of structural issues, 
including falling high school education rankings, increasing 
income and wealth inequality, and a problematic health -
care system, it remains an attractive destination for invest -
ment, company establishment and headquartering. This 
creates a plausible scenario where the USD maintains its 
structural strength. This trend has been in evidence during 
2015, as the US business and credit cycle looks to be more 
advanced than those of other regions. 
World Economic Forum  17
Further dollar strength would add to the difficulties of 
emerging market economies whose struggles are currently 
garnering headlines. Countries maintaining dollar pegs 
would face extra competitive pressures. And the cost of debt 
servicing would also rise for emerging countries and com
-
panies that have used the period of low US interest rates and 
broad USD weakness since the financial crisis to increase 
significantly their USD ­denominated borrowing. 	
Furthermore, we noted in a previous UBS whitepaper, 
“Macro problems, micro solutions,” that shifts in technology 
may prove disruptive for other economies and sectors. 	
The Fourth Industrial Revolution increases the magnitude and 
probability of tail risks related to cybersecurity and geopolitics, 
but may spur regional action to invest and embrace Fourth 
Industrial Revolution benefits.	
Labor markets in manufacturing could be materially 
affect   ed as capital such as robotics and 3D printing, for 
example, displace low and middle ­skill jobs. For some 
economies on the cusp of joining the global manufactur	
-	
ing and trading system (for example in South Asia, the 
Middle East, Africa, and parts of Latin America), extreme 
automation of capital in the US could have short ­run	  	
negative demographic and employment effects. In 	 	
addition, the “onshoring” of work back to the US (and 	 	
shortening of global supply chains) from areas with a 	 	
former comparative advantage of labor could be seen as 	 	
a risk to developing nations.  In particular, the rise of extreme automation and connec	-	
tivity	 via “smart grid” systems, while improving energy  	
efficiency and helping match supply with demand more	 	
effectively, may be vulnerable to hacks which shut down	 
electricity transmission or generation systems entirely. 
According to Symantec, the energy sector is now one of 
the five most ­targeted sectors for hackers globally, and in 
2012 Saudi Aramco spent weeks repairing its computer 
systems after a virus attack. In 2013, parts of the Austrian 
and German power grids were threatened after an IT acci -
dent led to the network being flooded with data.
Similarly, cloud computing allows companies to outsource 
a host of IT tasks via extreme connectivity, including soft -
ware installation and server maintenance. This gives them 
more flexibility and allows them to better deploy capital 
to their core business. But if the IT infrastructure of a large 
number of companies is being managed and distributed 
As highlighted in more detail in a later section of this paper, 
however, extreme connectivity may allow a shortening 
in the length of global supply chains. One particular impli
-
cation of extreme automation and connectivity in the Fourth 
Industrial Revolution will be the role of “virtual” trade in 
ideas and intellectual property versus “traditional” trade in 
physical goods. Relative advantages in developed market 
legal protections of intangible ideas may lead to “onshoring” 
from emerging markets to the developed world initially, 
but this trend may reverse over the longer term as emerging 
nations grow and develop their infrastructure to embrace 
extreme automation and connectivity.	
2	
Rising risks relating to cyber warfare and geopolitics
Extreme connectivity also increases the risks posed by 
cyber security breaches, as we have highlighted in previous 
White Papers, including “The New Global Context: Could 
economic transformations threaten stability?” 
2 We also acknowledge that Leontief’s Paradox may arise, whereby the US could end up importing capital ­intensive products while exporting 
labor ­intensive products, albeit where the labor intensity used to produce US exports is highly skilled, relative to other nations.
World Economic Forum  19
by a single cloud
­computing provider, the damage inflicted 
by hackers could be significantly greater than an attack on 
a single company. 
Cyber security dangers vary significantly between nations, 	
with many emerging markets more exposed. Eurasia 
Group’s cyber risk index, which rates the threat to busi	
-	
nesses from 1 to 100, indicates a relatively elevated risk 
reading of 88 for Chinese firms, versus a safe score of just 
14 for Swiss firms. The United States, despite its relatively 
robust cyber environ   ment, is considered a prestige target   
by foreign states and dissidents and as a result Eurasia 
Group gives it a rating of 77, putting it at far greater risk 
than most rich nations. 
The potential magnitude of such impacts could increase as 
connected networks grow larger due to the Fourth Industrial 
Revolution. Without strong international and institutional 
frameworks governing the protection of data, cyber security, 
and Internet privacy, access to the full benefits of extreme 
connectivity may be stymied. In January of last year, UBS’ 
whitepaper “The New Global Context” called for greater 
global coordination on cyber-security. We expect these calls 
to continue and intensify.
Extreme connectivity is also fostering geopolitical tensions 
in several ways. It increases the ability of diverse groups 
to organize protests and offers the potential for greater 
publicity to violent extremists. Recent examples have high -
lighted the convening power of social media across the 
world. Widely distributed images of Mohamed Bouazizi, 
and his self-immolation in protest over police corruption, 
helped give rise to a mass movement that displaced the 
Tunisian government and triggered the broader Arab 
Spring in the Middle East. Extreme connectivity has also 
proved a threat to mainstream political parties across the  globe. The 2015 mass protests in Brazil drew millions to 
the street, with social media again proving a driving force. 
In Western Europe too, mainstream political parties have 
been threatened by the rapid rise of protest movements that 
have exploited social media to galvanize their followers. 
Extreme connectivity has the potential to aid violent extre
  m- 
ists – both in recruitment and in generating publicity. A large 
quantity of online propaganda material is now being posted 
on social media platforms. The Islamic State has been 
deploying the Internet to win supporters throughout the 
world, managing to recruit citizens from the US and Europe 
to their cause. Furthermore, social media has tended to 
magnify the impact of violent events – such as the tragic 
terrorist attacks in Paris. The photographs and videos taken 
by witnesses can now be broadcast worldwide, providing 
the kind of mass publicity that terrorists are eager to gener -
ate. The possibility of global coverage increases the incen -
tive for extremist groups to perpetrate further assaults. 
Technology also has the potential to heighten political ten -
sions by increasing economic inequality. The returns to 
technology have been uneven, with automation threatening 
the job security of lower ­ skilled workers and helping boost 
the pay and investment returns of their highly ­skilled coun -
terparts. This economic inequality may be exacerbated fur -
ther if higher ­income, higher ­skilled workers consume more 
low capital ­intensity goods and services (facing disinflationary 
pressures) relative to lower ­income, lower ­skill labor.
This may further contribute to the appeal of more populist 
political parties, but should also incentivize governments 
to bridge inequality gaps by investing regionally in technol -
ogies that allow extreme automation and connectivity to 
thrive. We focus on regional impacts of the Fourth Industrial 
Revolution in the next section.	
Internet	
network	
cyberstalking	
confidential information	
confidential information
copyright infringement	
copyright infringement	
copyright infringement	
denial­of­service attack	
denial­of­service attack	
copyright infringement	
cyberwarfare	
cyberwarfare	cyberwarfare	
cyberwarfare	
cyberwarfare
spam	
spam	
spam	
spam
threats	
law	law
victim	
victim	
law	virus	
virus	
cyber defamation law	financial theft
financial theft
phishing scams	
phishing scams hate crime	
hate crimeinternet crime
internet crime
threats	
hate crime threats
cyberterrorism cyberwarare cracking	phishing scams	
cyberterrorism
cyberstalking
network	cracking	
phishing scams	
phishing scams	financial theft	
malware malware	malware	
fraud
offense	
offense	
offense
network	espionage	
crime	
IT	Hacking	
cyber defamation law	
cyberstalking hacking 
hacking 
cracking
ITIT
victim
victim
virus
cyberheist
cyberheist	cyberheist	child groomingchild grooming	chat rooms
chat rooms	
chat rooms	
fraud
denial­of­service attack
confidential information	espionage	
copyright infringement	cyberwarfare	
cyber defamation law
cyberterrorism	
espionage	
fraud 
W  21	
3. Who will be the regional 
winners and losers?	
“Flexibility” will be key to success in the Fourth Industrial 
  Revolution – economies with the most flexible labor markets, 
educational systems, infrastructure, and legal systems are 
likely to be relative beneficiaries. 
Developed economies are likely to be relative winners at this 
stage, whereas developing economies face greater challenges 
as their abundance of low­skill labor ceases to be an advan -
tage and becomes more of a headwind.
Emerging markets in their demographic prime may find that 
extreme automation displaces low ­skill workers, but that 
their limited technology infrastructures do not allow them to 
reap the full benefits of extreme connectivity.	
An industrial revolution leads to significant changes in how 
economies work. Traditional economic structures change 
or become obsolete, and new economic structures establish 
themselves. Through this process, an industrial revolution 
can also become a significant force for specific disruption 
to the structures of the labor market. 
How an economy and its labor force adapt to changing 
economic structures will determine how successful a nation 
is in responding to the Fourth Industrial Revolution. By and 
large, the nature of the technological change is not that  relevant to the relative economic performance of different 
sectors and economies in the wake of an industrial revo­
lution. There may be peculiar instances where extreme auto
-
mation and connectivity can overcome problems that are 
specific to an economy – capital that helps an ageing work -
force remain productive or overcomes an environmental 
challenge, for instance. 	
As a general rule, however, it is an economy’s ability 	 	
to adapt to the changes associated with new technology 
that matters. 22 1. Capital for labor substitution
Past industrial revolutions have been about substituting 
capital for some forms of labor. This often leads to what has 
been described as the “lump of labor” fallacy – the false 
idea that there is a finite amount of work to go around.
Some jobs will be replaced by capital following extreme 
automation. Yet because people tend to extrapolate from 
current circumstances, the idea that we will all be replaced 
by AI often causes concern in the population at large. 
In fact, some existing jobs are likely to be replaced by ma­ 
chines, and new jobs in hitherto unimagined professions 
will emerge.
However, if the Fourth Industrial Revolution is to be a net 
benefit to an economy, then it is vital that the jobs market 
is flexible enough to adapt. All too often the reaction to 
structural change and associated selective job losses is to 
throw up barriers to labor flexibility and labor mobility. 
If the market starts to resemble medieval guilds with arcane 
qualifications or other barriers to entry, then either the 
economy will be unable to adapt to new technology, or it 
will be left behind in comparison to other economies. 
2. Skills and inequality
Related to the importance of the flexibility of labor is the 
importance of the nature of skills in the labor force. This 
comes about in two ways. The Fourth Industrial Revolution 
should value high ­skilled groups of workers more than 
  low ­skill labor. High ­skill labor is likely to be able to under -
stand the new technology more effectively and to adapt 
and maximize subsequent economic returns. 
Perhaps more importantly, however, the skills that are 
required need to be flexible in themselves. An engineer, 
educated in a traditional system of rote learning, may be  well equipped for the standards and economic structures 
of today. But they are likely to find it harder, at least in the 
short
­run, to adapt their skills to a world of extreme auto -
mation and connectivity that will shape future economic 
structures. The issue of flexibility in learning skills can work 
against an economy that has a high education level. Being 
skilled in change, as well as being skilled in one’s profession, 
is crucial. 
This issue also highlights the risk that the Fourth Industrial 
Revolution will raise income inequality. The monetary 
return to skills is likely to benefit those who are already on 
high incomes. Lower ­ skilled, lower­paid workers will suffer 
from relative income underperformance. But middle ­income 	
workers who face declining barriers to entry due to extreme	 
automation, or who lack the flexibility to be able to change 	
their skills to meet the requirements of extreme connectivity,	 
could face a decline in relative standard of living. The result -
ing increase in inequality risks slowing the progress of 
extreme automation and connectivity. A threatened middle 	
class may press for restrictive or repressive policies in a futile	 
attempt to hold back the tide of technological change. This 	
would damage the ability of an economy to benefit, as an 
early adopter, from the Fourth Industrial Revolution. 
3. Infrastructure and inertia
Infrastructure is generally thought of in its physical mani	-	
festation, but from an economic perspective it is the 
behavior that infrastructure helps to shape that is impor	
-	
tant. For instance, an economy cannot easily move to 
a   car ­free transport system if the existing transport infra	
-	
structure is centered around an extensive road network. 
The cost of scrapping the sunk costs of existing infra	
-	
structure may ossify economic behavior, in spite of the	 
advantages of adapting to a post ­industrial revolution 
environment. 	
A framework for determining 
regional winners and losers	
There are four areas where flexibility and the ability to   
adapt are likely to determine economic success in the   
Fourth Industrial Revolution.
World Economic Forum  23
Economies that have built an infrastructure designed for 
the economic status quo, which is not readily adapted, will 
therefore be at a potential standard of living disadvantage 
in the future. This does not necessarily have to be a growth 
disadvantage; rebuilding existing infrastructure that has 
become obsolete can be growth-positive. 
The Fourth Industrial Revolution is likely to change the 
physical location of human economic activity – localized 
production, home working and the idea of the factory 
complex or the urban central business district. Having a phys
-
ical infrastructure that is adaptable will speed the pace of 
adjustment for an economy.
4. Robustness and flexibility of legal system
The Fourth Industrial Revolution will likely emphasize intel -
lectual property. Trade in ideas that can be converted into 
a product at a local level (close to the demand) will become 	
more economically attractive as a business model. As already 
highlighted in the previous section, global trade could 
become more “virtual” than physical (aside from basic 	 
materials).
Extreme connectivity raises the imperative of protecting 
intellectual property, where practical. An economy that offers 	
robust protection is more likely to have a relative advan	-	
tage, in the sense that the legal structures offer 	innovators	 	
the ability to capitalize on their ideas, and foreign innovators	 
will be happy to sell their ideas into that economy.
The legal approach also needs to be flexible to deal with 
any new legal challenges that may arise. If a person’s DNA 	
contains a cure for a disease, who owns the rights to that	 
DNA? There are questions as to how such a product should 
be developed, and indeed whether it should be legally 
  protected at all. Revolutions are not linear (one of the reasons that they are 
called what they are). This means that assessing beneficiaries 
in advance is always subjective and fraught with difficulty. 
However, using the framework outlined above, it is possible 
to take a systematic approach to the Fourth Industrial 	 
Revo  lution. 
The following table examines the relative strengths of differ -
ent economies using rankings from the World Economic 
Forum (WEF) Global Competitiveness Report. Given the impor­
tance of responsive human capital to the success of any 
industrial revolution, the labor market element is covered by 
a skills level and a proxy for skills adaptability (in the form 
of its output, innovation). 	
Each figure represents either a rank or an average of ranks 
in specific WEF categories. The WEF Global Competitiveness 
Report does provide specific scores as well as ranks. However, 
Country assessment	
the purpose of this table is to judge the relative readiness of 
different economies to take advantage of the Fourth Industrial 
Revolution. A lower score implies a better relative readiness. 
The “overall impact” ranking in this table should therefore be 
treated as a means of obtaining a relative positioning, and 	
 	
not as a 	statement	 about the degree of an economy’s absolute	 
suitability for dealing with the Fourth Industrial Revolution. 	
It should not come as a major surprise that developed 
economies cluster towards the top of this list currently, and 
developing economies cluster towards the bottom. The 
competitive disadvantages of a developed economy (lower 
availability of low-cost labor) are in some way mitigated by 
the consequences of extreme automation and connectivity. 
Yet the competitive advantages of developing economies 
(abundance of low ­skill labor) become more of a relative 
liability in the context of the changes that the Fourth Indus -
trial Revolution is expected to bring about. 
World Economic Forum  25	
Adapted relative rankings from World Economic Forum Global 
  Competitiveness Report, using Fourth Industrial Revolution categories	 3.	
Labour structures 
flexible?
Skill level high?
Education allos adapti-
ve skills?
Infrascructure suitable?
Legal protections?
Overall impact
Developed (DM), emer-
ging market (EM) or 
frontier market (FM)?	
Switzerland 1414.0 6.75 3.4DM
Singapore 2193.5 9.00 4.9DM
Netherlands 17386.512.50 9.4DM
Finland 262219.0 1.2510.1 DM
United States 46414.0 23.00 10.2DM
United Kingdom 518 126.010.00 10.2DM
Hong Kong 313 274.510.00 11.5DM
Norway 971319.0 11.50 11.9DM
Denmark 1091015.5 17.75 12.5DM
New Zealand 610 2421.5 6.2513.6 DM
Sweden 2012 712.0 19.75 14.2DM
Japan 2121 512.0 18.00 15.4DM
Germany 2817 69.518.75 15.9DM
Ireland 13152119.0 11.50 15.9DM
Canada 719 2216.0 20.50 16.9DM
Taiwan 22141120.0 31.25 19.7 EM
Australia 3682318.5 17.75 20.7DM
Austria 40161719.5 17.25 22.0DM
Belgium 5451617.5 21.522.8 DM
France 51251812.0 31.00 27.4DM
Israel 4528 326.0 38.50 28.1DM
Malaysia 19362035.5 34.50 29.0 EM
Portugal 66262824.5 32.25 35.4DM
Czech Republic 47293535.0 44.75 38.2 EM
South Korea 83231920.0 62.25 41.5 EM
Chile 63335042.0 39.25 45.5 EM
Spain 92303717.5 61.25 47.6DM
China 37683156.5 64.25 51.4 EM
Kazakhstan 18607259.5 68.25 55.6 FM
Poland 81316448.5 58.00 56.5 EM
Russia 50386847.5114.00 63.5EM
Thailand 67565751.0 88.00 63.8 EM
Italy 126453231.5 87.75 64.5DM
Hungary 77575148.0 90.25 64.7 EM
South Africa 107833859.0 42.75 66.0 EM
Greece 116437735.0 67.00 67.6 EM
Philippines 82634879.0 78.00 70.0 EM
Indonesia 11565360 73.570.25 70.8 EM
Turkey 127556058.5 77.75 75.7 EM
Colombia 86707677.0102.75 82.4EM
India 1039042100.5 81.50 83.4 EM
Mexico 114865966.0100.00 85.0EM
Brazil 122938464.0 97.75 92.2 EM
Peru 6482116 88.5113.25 92.8EM
Argentina 139399378.0125.75 95.0FM
4 Labor market flexibility takes the ranking for the seventh WEF pillar “Labor market efficiency.” Skills level uses the 
fifth  pillar  “Higher  education  and  training.”  The  question  as  to  whether  education  allows  adaptive  skills  takes  the 
ranking  for  the  twelfth  pillar,  “Innovation,”  as  innovation  can  be  thought  of  as  a  benchmark  of  the  output  of 
  adaptive  skills.  Infrastructure  suitable  is  an  average  of  the  rankings  in  the  ninth  and  second  pillars  “Technological 
readiness” and “Infrastructure.” Legal protections is an average of the rankings for “property rights” (1.01), “intel -
lectual property protection” (1.02), “judicial independence” (1.06) and “ethical behaviour of firms” (1.17) – this last 
category being included as trade in intellectual property necessitates a degree of confidence in the honor of one’s 
trading partners. Market description in the last column is based upon MSCI country classification methodology. 26 However, it does highlight that EM economies are at risk 
of squandering their demographic prime, if they are yet to 
move from low­income to middle ­income. Many of these 
economies have still not dealt with the challenge of previ -
ous industrial revolutions. Their output and employment 
are still largely driven by agriculture, small-scale manufac -
turing and low ­skilled services, large parts of which are in 
the informal economy. These are economies with low capi -
tal stock and high population growth rates. They will face 
the threat of the Fourth Industrial Revolution compromising 
low ­skilled jobs via extreme automation, but may not have 
the technological ability to enjoy the relative gains that 
could be re-distributed via extreme connectivity. 
When the Fourth Industrial Revolution arrives, a country’s 
present state of industrial technology and demographic 
patterns will together determine how successfully it adapts, 
economically and politically, to extreme automation and 
extreme connectivity. The Fourth Industrial Revolution will 
take the emphasis away from demographic quantity to 
demographic quality. 
4 The years for the various economies we studied are as follows. India: 1996; China: 1981; Korea: 1977; Thailand: 1984; Indonesia: 1991; Brazil: 
1990; South Africa: 1995; Mexico: 1997; Turkey: 1992; Malaysia: 1993; Vietnam: 1998; Bangladesh: 2003; Egypt: 2002.	
Historically, there has been a quite consistent pattern among 
economies that have been able to benefit from their demo -
graphic dividend (through their demographic prime, they 
galvanized serious increases in productivity by shifting labor 
from agriculture to manufacturing through education and 
by promoting more flexible skills). This in turn substantially 
raised manufacturing’s share of GDP. This is the same pattern 
seen earlier in many developed markets such as Germany, 
US and Japan. 
In Figure 1 and Figure 2 we attempt to show how manu -
facturing has evolved along with demographics in various 
economies. We define t0 as the year when the working 
age population as a proportion of the total population of 
an economy rose above 60%. This is the time we use as 
a proxy for the point of inflexion, the year we subjectively 
define as the beginning of an economy’s demographic 
bulge	
  4. We track how manufacturing as a percentage of 
GDP evolved just before and well after this inflexion point. 	
0.50 0.75
1.00
1.25
1.50	
1.50
1.25
1.00
0.75
0.50	
t-5 t-4 t-3 t-2 t-1 t0 t+1 t+2 t+3 t+4 t+5 t+6 t+7 t+8 t+9 t+10 t+11 t+1\2 t+13 t+14 t+15 t+16 t+17 t+18 t+19 t+20	
!"# !"$!"%!"&!"' !(!)' !)&!)%!)$!)#	
t–4t–3t–2t–1t–0t0t+1t+2t+3t+4t+5t+6t+7t+8t+9t+10t+11t+12t+13t+14t+15t+16t+17t+18t+19t+20	
Figure 1: Path of Manufacturing to GDP – demographic successes	
Vietnam	Thailand	Bangladesh	Indonesia	Korea	Malaysia	
Demographic inﬂexion year (t0) deﬁned as one when working age population as % of total population rises above 60%; Manufacturing to GDP ratio is set at 1 at t0). 
Indexed, t0=1	
t–5	
Source: Haver, UBS
World Economic Forum  27
Figure 1:
 shows the success stories. It is well known that 
China, Korea, and Thailand are past their demographic prime. 	
But they did make the moment of demographic bulge count. 
Correlation does not imply causation, yet it is telling that   
in these countries manufacturing as a percentage of GDP 
rose significantly once the working age population rose 
above 60%. 	
This coincided with a big upswing in higher per 
capita incomes, savings, and typically also in export shares. 	
In Figure 2 we show the countries – some of which, like 
India, are current market darlings – which do not really dis -
play the historical pattern (evident in demographic success  stories) of a big boost to manufacturing when their demo
-
graphic prime began. In a sense, this latter group of   
countries has not yet adapted even to the Second and 
Third Industrial Revolutions.
As we will show in our final section on investment conclu -
sions, the power of extreme automation and connectivity 
to change global manufacturing may pose nearer-term 
challenges for emerging market (EM) lower ­skill labor and 
EM assets, relative to developed market peers. We reem­
phasize the need, in the Fourth Industrial Revolution, for 
“flexibility” as the key to relative competitiveness.	
0.50 0.75
1.00
1.25
1.50	
1.50
1.25
1.00
0.75
0.50	
t-5 t-4 t-3 t-2 t-1 t0 t+1 t+2 t+3 t+4 t+5 t+6 t+7 t+8 t+9 t+10 t+11 t+1\2 t+13 t+14 t+15 t+16 t+17 t+18 t+19 t+20	
!"# !"$!"%!"&!"' !(!)' !)&!)%!)$!)#	
t–5t–4t–3t–2t–1t–0t0t+1t+2t+3t+4t+5t+6t+7t+8t+9t+10t+11t+12t+13t+14t+15t+16t+17t+18t+19t+20	
Figure 2: Path of Manufacturing to GDP – demographic question marks	
Mexico	Turkey	Egypt	India	South Africa	Brazil	Source: Haver, UBS	
Demographic inﬂexion year (t0) deﬁned as one when working age population as % of total population rises above 60%; Manufacturing to GDP ratio is set at 1 at t0). 
Indexed, t0=1 Like prior industrial revolutions, the Fourth Industrial Revo-
lution will likely have major repercussions across geogra -
phies and industries. Extreme automation is likely to gener -
ate substantial productivity gains for incumbents. But	 
extreme automation using AI could also disrupt traditional 	
business models. While there is a lot of hype surrounding	 	
the theme, we believe some of the long-term investment	 
implications are under-appreciated. We highlight below 
some likely implications and how extreme automation and 
connectivity are starting to shape investment debates.	
4. What are the investment 
consequences?	
Given current assessments of relative competitiveness,	  
emerging markets may be less well placed to profit from Fourth   
Industrial Revolution benefits, relative to developed markets.	
Four investment implications from the Fourth Industrial 
Revolution are outlined below:
1. Emerging market assets relative to developed 
market assets 
Based on the economic and regional assessments outlined 
earlier in this Whitepaper, the Fourth Industrial Revolution	  	
is expected disproportionally to benefit developed markets	 	
at the expense of emerging markets, at least given current 
infrastructures. 
World Economic Forum  29	
We expect further disruption to traditional industries from 
extreme automation and connectivity.	
We have noted how current labor market composition 
means emerging markets have more lower­skilled 	
 	
workers and less flexibility to raise skills than developed 	 	
markets. We have also noted the nearer ­term risks of	 	
a higher US dollar due to the US’ current advantage 	 	
in Fourth Industrial Revolution technologies. Furthermore, 
we have noted that the shift from physical to ”virtual” 
trade may impact emerging market growth drivers and 
large proportions of the emerging market labor demo	
-	
graphic, at least until investments in infrastructures 	 	
are made and bear fruit.
The beta of global trade to global growth already seems  
to have declined since the global financial crisis, and this is 
one of the key reasons EM growth rates have been so 
weak in recent times. A further decline in import propen -
sity of advanced economies, along with the risk of a struc -
turally stronger US dollar, has the potential to hit emerging 
markets’ earnings and cost of equity at the same time. 
However, this may also be a catalyst for emerging markets 
to invest in labor markets, transferable skills, and infrastruc -
ture over time to counteract this relative disadvantage. 
2. Traditional industries disrupted
A number of traditional industries will likely be disrupted  
by the advances that the Fourth Industrial Revolution  
will bring to market. Investors may be tempted to pursue  
disruptive trends by investing in the early beneficiaries  	
of extreme automation and connectivity, including robotics, 
artificial intelligence, or social media firms.
However, directly picking winners from the new crop of	 
technology firms may not be straightforward. This proved 
to be the case during the Dotcom boom of the late 1990s 	
and, recently, the aggressive valuations granted to several	 
tech “unicorns” – a term for a start ­up worth USD 1 billion 
or more – have come under pressure. 
For example, payment provider Square was valued at USD 
6 billion in a round of private financing in 2014. But an  	
initial public offering in late 2015 gave the firm a value of 
closer to USD 4 billion. That has raised worries about the	 
prospects for other leaders of the Fourth Industrial Revolu -
tion which may also go public over the coming year. 	
It may be more prudent for investors not to invest in richly 
valued disruptor firms, but rather to avoid traditional indus -
tries that have been disrupted. In retail, for example, auto	-	
mation seems to be mainly a threat, as it could have an indi	-	
rect negative impact on traditional retailers by fostering 
online competition. Particularly in food, the online business	 
is growing quickly but still represents less than 1% in most 
markets. 	
UBS summarizes the possible disruption threats and produc	-	
tivity benefits, by sector, in the below table:	
Assessment relative to the plan
Medium High
Productivity benefits High
UtilitiesAutos, IT services
Medium Insurance, banks, travel and  
leisure, medtech Construction
Low Food retail, general retail	
Source: UBS, as of November 15, 2015.
For more detail please see the UBS Research Q-Series report entitled “How disruptive will the new dawn of artificial intelligence be?”, published on 15 November 2015.
Figure 3: Which sectors are at risk from disruption by artificial intelligence? 3. Big data beneficiaries
Big data is arguably a result of both extreme automation (in 
data analysis) and extreme connectivity (in terms of data 
collection). One could argue that big data is a “child” of the 
Fourth Industrial Revolution. As explored in our historical 
analysis of industrial revolutions, big data may be another 
example of how extreme connectivity is giving rise to new	
 	
business models and expanding economic supply in ways 
previously not possible. Among the most prominent poten	-	
tial beneficiaries of the Fourth Industrial Revolution are 
firms that are able to harness big data effectively, provide data analysis, and offer protection from the threat of 
cyber
­attacks.	
Digital data usage globally is doubling every two years. The 
size of the digital universe is on track to reach 44 zettabytes	 
(ZB) by 2020, a 50 ­fold increase over 2010, according to 	
 	
IDC and IMC. That is equivalent to 318 iPhones (32 GB) per 
household. This surge reflects both the expanding use of 
Internet-enabled devises in rich nations, embodied by the	 	
trend toward extreme connectivity via the Internet of Things, 
by which household appliances are linked to the Internet.	
Big data beneficiaries include firms that harness big data to 
cut costs or target sales, firms that automate big data analysis, 
and firms that keep big data secure.
World Economic Forum  31	
First, there are several industries with the potential to har-
ness big data and cut costs, increase efficiency, and boost 
profits:
•  Within retail, for example, large supermarkets have long 
been analyzing big data sets collected through store 	
 	
card use to understand customer behavior. But improve	-	
ments in AI are now enabling extreme automation in the 	 	
data analysis process. Customer data on physical in ­store	 	
movements, collected by tracking smartphone data, 	 	
may allow more targeted sales strategies. When linked to 
existing AI infrastructure in supply chains, it implies an 
almost total, highly intelligent and demand ­flexible auto	
-	
mation of retail supply chains, with potentially significant 
cost savings.	
•  Within utilities, a combination of automated big data 
analytics and extreme connectivity should have effi -
ciency and profit ­boosting impacts over time. By 2014, 
General Electric’s big data product Predix had been 	
installed in 23,000 wind turbines and close to 4,000 gas 
turbines, according to a New York Times article. 	
•  Applications of big data in healthcare also offer possible 	
investment opportunities. Recently, medtech firm 
Medtronic announced US Food and Drug Administration	 
approval of the first app ­based remote monitoring sys -
tem for pacemaker users. Extreme connectivity now 
allows pacemaker patients to send diagnostic data from 
their device, via smartphone or tablet, directly to their 
doctor, who can assess patient health and suggest any 
changes to the course of treatment. 	
•  Increasing computing power has also been driving 	
down the cost of analyzing the genome and the pro	-	
teome, the sequence of proteins expressed by genes.	  	
An increasing understanding of the genome is leading 
to medical breakthroughs in fields such as oncology. 
The impact of big data, however, extends beyond the 
treatment of a single class of diseases. The falling cost 
of sequencing could make it possible to tailor treat	
-	
ments to best suit each individual, which could reduce 
waste and in turn boost medical outcomes and the 
profitability of hospitals. 
Second, software firms that provide tools to analyze large	
 	
untapped pools of data, too complex to manipulate with	 
standard methods available until now, will continue to ben -
efit. The analytics software market alone is expected to 
reach USD 75 billion by 2020, with solid mid ­teens growth, 
according to UBS estimates. 
Lastly, firms that can protect big data should thrive in a 	
Fourth Industrial Revolution. Already in 2014, more than 
348 million identities of customers or employees were 
exposed to cybercrime, with an average 21 hours and USD	 	
358 per person wasted on resolving online crime, according 
to Symantec’s Norton Cybersecurity Insights Report. 	UBS 
research predicts that by 2020 the projected market 
size for 	
security and safety (including measures to prevent cyber 
warfare) will have grown to around USD 700 billion (from 
USD 500 billion in 2014).  4. Blockchain applications
Blockchain, a shared digital ledger system that underpins 
Bitcoin, is the ultimate product of extreme connectivity 
since it relies for its existence on the interconnection of a	 
large number of computers. The technology works by  	
producing a record of ownership on a shared database that	 
should be impossible to edit or forge. It is a system that 
could have significant investment implications. 
Though Bitcoin gave rise to blockchain, it is not clear 
whether the original crypto currency will survive and flour -	
ish. It is already facing competition from online monetary	 
units that are more secure and easier to transact. The first 	
mover advantage may not be sufficient to ensure the 
future of Bitcoin. The outlook for its technological under -
pinning, blockchain, looks more secure, given possible 
applications in other industries: 
Financial services 
In the financial services sector, the potential effects are 
mixed, with widely different implications for bulge brackets 
to retail banks and from money transfer firms to insurers.  Although the technology remains immature, a host of 
mainstream financial institutions are expressing interest in 
developing it. 
For example, UBS is also one of 30 banks to have joined 
R3, a global consortium working on ways to use blockchain 
in financial markets. Exchanges like NASDAQ have said 
they plan on using a blockchain system to track deals in pri
-	
vate company shares. Furthermore, the Lloyd’s insurance	 	
market has expressed interest in the system as part of a 
modernization initiative.
Blockchain could prove a double edged sword for the 
banking industry. On the one hand, it has the potential to 
boost profitability in several ways. First, when money is 
transferred between banks, each institution needs to 
engage in a labor-intensive process of ledger reconciliation 
to confirm that the correct sums have been processed. A 
blockchain system, by eliminating the need for such a pro-
cess, could allow banks to cut middle ­skill administrative 
labor, a point cited in our assessment of the economic 
impacts of the Fourth Industrial Revolution. According to 
Santander, more efficient digital ledgers could cut costs in 
the banking industry by up to USD 20 billion a year.
On the other hand, the ability to process transactions 
directly between parties without the need for the trusted	 	
central utilities that currently serve the function of	  	
reducing counterparty risk poses a risk to traditional banking. 	 	
Extreme connectivity could therefore lead to further disinter	-	
mediation, a theme we touched upon first in our 2014 
Whitepaper, “Macro problems, micro solutions: How trade, 
technology and finance can help keep the recovery going.”
For international transfers, especially those involving small 
institutions and correspondent banks, payments can take 	
Blockchain applications could benefit firms that use them to	 
automate processes securely, to cut out costly intermediaries, 
and to protect intellectual property.
World Economic Forum  33	
three to four days before they are settled. Since blockchain	 	
transactions can be processed in as little as 15 seconds,	 	
extreme connectivity shortens this process, freeing up capi	-	
tal for trading, investment, and other purposes. While	  	
near real­time settlement would be good for bank clients, 	 	
it could possibly reduce intra ­day liquidity for banks	  	
since end-of-day settlement gives them access to capital 	 	
for longer.
Insurance could also be transformed. It is possible to 	 	
envision insurance processing using extreme automation,	 
with blockchain policies that instantly pay claims 	
 	
based on preset information from a trusted third party. 
Lloyd’s of London has been looking into ways to 	 	
use blockchains to improve access to information and	  	
cut administrative costs.
Retail banking operations and money transfer businesses 
also face a clear risk. Blockchain could theoretically	  
allow individuals to store money, bypassing the need for 	
banks. Money transfer operators would also face a	  	
gradual erosion of their market share under such conditions.
Outside financial services
In branded goods or indeed any business that faces threats 
to intellectual property, blockchain as a reliable method of	 
verification is a potential boon. The global trade in counter -
feit goods and pirated products, estimated by the ICC to 
be worth as much as USD 1.77 trillion in 2015, stretches 	
beyond faux-designer handbags and counterfeit medicines.
“Tagging” the authentic goods with blockchain ­enabled 
digital fingerprints will make a life ­saving difference to 
those in need, – those who are often the most exposed to 
the dangers wrought by adulterated medicines, drugs,  
or baby food. The WHO estimates that more than 50% of 
medications purchased from online vendors where the  
doctor’s name is concealed are counterfeit. Blockchain appli	-	
cations,	 such as BlockVerify used to track pharmaceuticals 
throughout the supply chain, improve the likelihood that 
consumers receive authentic products. 
A demand for transparency was borne in part by a crisis of 
brand trust. Access to more information at rapid speed 
across the globe is a result of extreme connectivity. Using 	
this extreme connectivity, consumers insist on knowing the 
origins of their staple goods—the coffee they drink (which	 
farm did it come from?), the jeans they wear (is there 
chemical residue leftover from dyeing?), or the steak they 
eat (truly hormone free?). 
Companies like Provenance are the first to tackle these 
issues by creating transparent supply chains for all types of 
products, versus those specialized in specific products like 
diamond and digital artwork in the cases of Everledger and 
Ascribe. Provenance was designed to track any type of 
product, throughout every part of its lifecycle – an example 
of key Fourth Industrial Revolution trends of extreme auto -
mation and connectivity.   www.ubs.com	
© UBS 2016. The key symbol and UBS are among the registered and unregistered trademarks of UBS. All rights reserved. 